--- Page 1 ---



Department of Mechanical Engineering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulation 2021 
III Year – V Semester 
ME3492 HYDRAULICS AND PNEUMATICS


--- Page 2 ---

HYDRAULICS AND PNEUMATICS 
 
UNIT I FLUID POWER PRINICIPLES AND HYDRAULIC PUMPS  
Introduction to Fluid power – Advantages and Applications – Fluid power systems – Types 
of fluids– Properties of fluids and selection – Basics of Hydraulics – Pascal’s Law – 
Principles of flow – Friction loss – Work, Power and Torque Problems, Sources of 
Hydraulic power : Pumping Theory – Pump Classification – Construction, Working, Design, 
Advantages, Disadvantages, Performance, Selection criteria of Linear and Rotary – Fixed 
and Variable displacement pumps – Problems.

UNIT II HYDRAULIC ACTUATORS AND CONTROL COMPONENTS  
Hydraulic Actuators: Cylinders – Types and construction, Application, Hydraulic 
cushioning – Hydraulic motors – Control Components: Direction Control, Flow control and 
pressure control valves – Types, Construction and Operation – Servo and Proportional 
valves – Applications – Accessories: Reservoirs, Pressure Switches – Applications – Fluid 
Power ANSI Symbols – Problems.

UNIT III HYDRAULIC CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS  
Accumulators, Intensifiers, Industrial hydraulic circuits – Regenerative, Pump Unloading, 
Double- Pump, Pressure Intensifier, Air-over oil, Sequence, Reciprocation, Synchronization, 
Fail-Safe, Speed Control, Hydrostatic transmission, Electro hydraulic circuits, Mechanical 
hydraulic servo systems.

UNIT IV PNEUMATIC AND ELECTRO PNEUMATIC SYSTEMS  
Properties of air – Perfect Gas Laws – Compressor – Filters, Regulator, Lubricator, Muffler, 
Air control Valves, Quick Exhaust Valves, Pneumatic actuators, Design of Pneumatic circuit 
– Cascade method – Electro Pneumatic System – Elements – Ladder diagram – Problems, 
Introduction to fluidics and pneumatic logic circuits.

UNIT V TROUBLE SHOOTING AND APPLICATIONS  
Installation, Selection, Maintenance, Trouble Shooting and Remedies in Hydraulic and 
Pneumatic systems, Design of hydraulic circuits for Drilling, Planning, Shaping, Surface 
grinding, Press and Forklift applications. Design of Pneumatic circuits for Pick and Place 
applications and tool handling in CNC Machine tools – Low cost Automation – Hydraulic 
and Pneumatic power packs.


--- Page 3 ---

TEXT BOOKS 
 
1. Majumdar S.R., “Pneumatic systems – Principles and maintenance”, Tata McGraw 
Hill, 1995  
 
2. Anthony Lal, “Oil hydraulics in the service of industry”, Allied publishers, 1982.  
 
3. Anthony Esposito, “Fluid Power with Applications”, Pearson Education 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCE BOOKS 
 
1. Anthony Esposito, “Fluid Power with Applications”, Pearson Education 2000. 
 
2. Majumdar S.R., “Oil Hydraulics”, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2000.  
 
3. Majumdar S.R., “Pneumatic systems – Principles and maintenance”, Tata McGraw 
Hill, 1995  
 
4. Anthony Lal, “Oil hydraulics in the service of industry”, Allied publishers, 1982.  
 
5. Harry L. Stevart D.B, “Practical guide to fluid power”, Taraoeala sons and Port Ltd. 
Broadey, 1976.  
 
6. Michael J, Prinches and Ashby J. G, “Power Hydraulics”, Prentice Hall, 1989. 
 
7. Dudelyt, A. Pease and John T. Pippenger, “Basic Fluid Power”, Prentice Hall, 1987.


--- Page 4 ---

UNIT I 
FLUID POWER PRINICIPLES AND HYDRAULIC PUMPS 
 
FLUID POWER: 
 
Fluid power is the technology that deals with the generation, control, and 
transmission of power – using pressurized fluids. It is used to push, pull, regulate, 
or drive virtually all the machines of modern industry.  
For example, fluid power steers and brakes automobiles, launches 
spacecraft, move earth, harvests crops, mines coal, drives machine tools, controls 
airplanes, processes food, and even drills teeth.  
Since a fluid can be either a liquid or a gas, fluid power is actually the general 
term used for hydraulics and pneumatics. Hydraulic systems use liquids such as 
petroleum oils, water, synthetic oils, and even molten metals the first hydraulic fluid 
to be used was water because it is readily available. However, water has many 
deficiencies. It freezes readily, is a relatively poor lubricant, and tends to rust metal 
components. Hydraulic oils are far superior and hence are widely used in lieu of 
water. Pneumatic systems use air as the gas medium because air is very abundant 
and can be readily exhausted into the atmosphere after completing its assigned 
task. 
 
FLUID SYSTEMS: 
            Two different types of fluid systems: fluid transport and fluid power. 
Fluid transport systems have as their sole objective the delivery of a fluid 
from one location to another to accomplish some useful purpose. Examples include 
pumping stations for pumping water to homes, cross- country gas lines, and 
systems where chemical processing takes place as various fluids are brought 
together.  
Fluid power systems are designed specially to perform work. The work is 
accomplished by a pressurized fluid bearing directly on an operating cylinder 
or fluid motor, which, in turn, provides the muscle to do the desired work. Of 
course, control components are also needed to ensure that the work is done 
smoothly accurately, efficiently, and safely.  
Liquids provide a very rigid medium for transmitting power and thus can 
provide huge forces to move loads with almost accuracy and precision. On the other 
hand, pneumatic systems exhibit spongy characteristics due to the compressibility 
for air. However, pneumatic systems are less expensive to build and operate. In 
addition, provisions can be made to control the operation of the pneumatic actuators 
that drive the loads.  
Fluid power equipment ranges in size from huge hydraulic presses to 
miniature fluid logic components used to build reliable control systems.


--- Page 5 ---

Advantages of Fluid Power 
 
1. Ease and accuracy of control. By the use of simple levers and push buttons, 
the operator of a fluid power system can readily start, stop, speed up or slow  
down, and position forces that provide any desired horsepower with tolerances 
as precise as one ten-thousandth of an inch. A fluid power system that allows an 
air craft pilot to raise and lower his landing gear. When the pilot move a small 
control valve in one direction, oil under pressure flows to one end of the cylinder 
to lower the landing gear. To retract the landing gear, the pilot move the valve 
lever in the opposite direction, allowing oil to flow into the other end of the 
cylinder. 
 
2. Multiplication force. A fluid power system (without using cumbers some gears, 
pulleys, and levers) can multiply forces simply and efficiently form a fraction of 
an ounce to several hundred tons of output. A rugged, powerful drive is required 
for handling huge logs. In this case, a turntable, which is drive by a hydraulic 
motor, can carry a 20,000 – 1b load at a 10ft radius under rough operating 
conditions. 
 
3. Constant force or torque. Only fluid power systems are capable of providing 
constant force or torque regardless of speed changes. This is accomplished 
whether the work output moves a few inches per hour, several hundred inches 
per minute, a few revolutions per hour, or thousands of revolutions per minute. 
An application in oceanography that involves the exploration and development of 
the ocean’s resources for the benefit of humankind. In this instance, it is 
important for the operator to apply a desired constant grabbing force through the 
use of the grappling hooks. 
4. Simplicity, safety, economy. In general, fluid power systems use fewer moving 
parts than comparable mechanical or electrical systems. Thus, they are simpler 
to maintain and operate. This, in turn, maximizes safety, compactness, and 
reliability, power steering control designed for off – highway vehicles. The 
steering unit. 
 
Additional benefits of fluid power systems include instantly reversible motion, 
automatic protection against over loads, and infinitely variable speed control. Fluid 
power systems also have the highest horse power per weight ratio of any known 
power source. 
 
 
DISADVANTAGES:


--- Page 6 ---

In spite of all these highly desirable features of fluid power, it is not a 
panacea for all power transmission problems. Hydraulic systems also have some 
draw backs. Hydraulic oils are messy, and leakage is impossible to eliminate 
completely. Hydraulic lines can burst, possibly resulting in human injury due to flying 
objects, if proper design is not implemented. Also, most hydraulic oils can cause 
fires if an oil leak occurs in an area of hot equipment. Therefore, each application 
must be studied thoroughly to determine the best overall design. It is hoped that this 
book will not only assist the reader in developing the ability to make these types of 
system selection decisions but also present in a straight forward way the techniques 
for designing, analyzing, and troubleshooting basic fluid power systems. 
 
Applications of Fluid Power 
 
1. Fluid power drives high-wire over head tram. Most overhead trams require a 
haulage or low cable to travel up or down steep inclines. However, the 22 
passenger, 12,000 –lb hydraulically powered and controlled sky tram is unique. 
It is self- propelled and travels on a stationary cable. Because the tram moves 
instead of the cable, the operator can stop, start, and reverse any one car 
completely independently of any other car in the tram system. Integral to the 
design of the Sky tram drive is a pump (driven by a standard eight – cylinder 
gasoline engine), which supplies pressurized fluid to four hydraulic motors. Each 
motor drives two friction drive wheels. 
 
2. Fluid power is applied to harvest corn. The world’s dependence on the United 
States for food has resulted in a great demand for agricultural equipment 
development. Fluid power is being applied to solve many of the problems 
dealing with the harvesting of food crops. 
 
3. Hydraulics power brush drives. Fluid power-driven brush drive used for 
cleaning roads, floors, etc., in various industrial locations. Mounted directly at the 
hub of the front and side seep- scrub brushes, compact hydraulic motors place 
power right where it’s needed. They eliminate bulky mechanical linkages for 
efficient, light weight machine design. They eliminate bulky mechanical linkages 
for efficient, lightweight machine design. The result is continuous, rugged 
industrial cleaning action at the flip flop of a simple valve. 
 
4. Fluid power positions and holds part for welding.  Welding operation in 
which a farm equipment manufacturer applied hydraulics for positioning and 
holding parts while welding is done. It is a typical example of how fluid power 
can be used in manufacturing and production operations to reduce costs and 
increases production.   
5. Fluid power performs bridge maintenance. A municipality used fluid power of 
years as a means for removing stress from structural members of bridges, 
making repairs, and replacing beams.


--- Page 7 ---

6. Fluid power is the muscle in industrial lift trucks. Hydraulic lift truck having a 
5000 – 1b capacity. The hydraulic system includes dual – action tilt cylinders 
and a hoist cylinder. Tilting action is smooth and sure for better load stability and 
easier load placement. A lowering valve in the hoist cylinder controls the speed 
of descent even if the hydraulic circuit is broken. Hydrostatic power steering is 
available as an optional feature. 
7. Fluid power drives front- end loaders. Front – end loader filling a dump truck 
with solid scooped up by a large hydraulic – powered bucket. Excellent load 
control is made possible with a specially designed flow control valve. The result 
is low effort and precise control; this keeps the operator working on the job 
longer and more efficiently. Thus, reduced operator fatigue is accompanied by 
increased production. 
8. Fluid power preserves the hear beat of life. Dr. Robert Jarvik made medical 
history with the design of an artificial, pneumatically actuated heart, which 
sustained the life of Dr. Barney Clark for over 100 days. Other health 
applications include artificial kidneys and valve –assisted bladders, which 
employ fluid power principle of pressure and flow. Miniature, oxygen-tight pumps 
are implanted in patients to provide continuous medication. These micro delivery 
pumps can either be permanent for internal use or disposable for external 
infusion of medicine. 
 
9. Hydraulics power robotic dexterous arm. A hydraulically powered robotic arm 
that has the strength and dexterity to torque down bolts with its fingers and yet 
can gingerly pick up an eggshell. This robotic arm is adept at using human tools 
such as hammers, electric drills, and tweezers and can even bat a base ball. 
The arm has and with a thumb and two fingers, as well as wrist, elbow, and 
shoulder. It has ten degrees of freedom, including a three – degree of freedom 
end effecter (hand) designed to handle human tools and other objects with 
human like dexterity. The servo control system is capable of accepting computer 
or human operator control inputs. The system can be designed for carrying out 
hazardous applications in the subsea, utilizes, or nuclear environments, and it is 
also available in a range of sizes from human proportions 6 ft long.


--- Page 8 ---

Types of Fluid power control systems 
 
Fluid power systems are also classified by the type of control system utilized. 
There are five basic types of fluid power control systems; closed-loop, open-loop 
electrical, fluid logic, and programmable logic. The following is a brief description of 
each of these five control systems. 
 
1. Closed – loop control system. A closed – loop system is one that use 
feedback. This means that the state of the output from the system is 
automatically sampled and compared (feedback) to the input or command signal 
by means of a device called a feedback transducer. If there is a difference 
between the command and feedback signals, action is taken to correct the 
system output until it matches the requirement imposed on the system. Closed-
loop systems are frequently called servo systems, and the valves used to direct 
fluid to the actuators are typically called servo valves. 
 
2. Open – loop control system.  An open – loop system does not use feedback. 
The output performance of the system: therefore depends solely on the 
characteristics of the individual components and how they interact in the circuit. 
Most hydraulic circuits are of the open-loop systems. This is because any errors 
such as slippage (oil leakage past seals, the magnitude of which depends on 
system pressure and temperature) are not compensated for in open-loop type, 
which are generally not so complex or as precise as closed –loop systems. This 
is because any errors such as slippage (oil leakage past seals, the magnitude of 
which depends on system pressure and temperature) are not compensated for 
in open loop systems. For example, the viscosity of a hydraulic fluid decreases 
(fluid becomes thinner) as its temperature rises. This increases oil leakage past 
seals inside pumps, which, in turn causes the speed of an actuator, such as a 
hydraulic motor, to drop. In a closed –loop system, a feedback transducer (for 
example, a taco meter, which generates a signal proportional to the speed at 
which it is rotated) would sense this speed reduction and feed a proportional 
signal back to the command signal. The difference between the two signals is 
used to control a servo valve, which would then increase the fluid flow rate to the 
hydraulic motor until its speed is at the required level. 
 
3. Electrical control system. This type is characterized by the fact that the fluid 
power system interacts with a variety of electrical components for control 
purposes, and relays can be used to operate electrical solenoids to control the 
operations of valves that direct fluid to the hydraulic actuators. An electrical 
solenoid control system permits the design of a very versatile fluid power circuit. 
Automatic machines such as those used in the machine – tool industry rely


--- Page 9 ---

principally on electrical components control the hydraulic muscles for doing the 
required work. The air craft and mobile equipment industries have also found 
that fluid power and electricity work very well together, especially where remote 
control is needed. By merely pressing a simple push-button switch, an operator 
can control a very complex machine to perform hundreds of machinery 
operations to manufacture a complete product. An electrically controlled fluid 
power system can be either of the open –loop or closed –loop type, depending 
on the precision required. 
 
 
4. Fluid logic control system. This type is characterized by the fact that the fluid 
power system interacts with fluid logic device instead of with electrical devices 
for control purposes. Two such fluid logic systems are called moving-part logic 
(MPL) and fluidics, which perform a wide variety of sensory and control 
functions. Among these control functions are AND/NAND, OR/NOR, and 
FLIPFLOP, logic capability. Fluid logic devices switch a fluid, usually air, from 
one outlet of the device to another outlet. Hence an output of a fluid logic device 
is either ON or OFF as it rapidly switches from one state to the other by the 
application of a control signal. 
 
5. Programmable logic control system. In this type, programmable logic 
controllers (PLCs) are used to control systems operation. In recent years. PLCs 
have increasingly been used in lieu of electromechanical relays to control fluid 
power systems. A PLC is a user –friendly electronic computer designed to 
perform logic functions such as AND, OR, and NOT for controlling the operation 
of industrial equipment and processes. A PLC consist of solid – state digital logic 
elements for mating logic decision and providing corresponding outputs. Unlike 
general- per-pose computers, a PLC is designed to operate in industrial 
environments where high ambient temperature and humidity levels may exists. 
PLCs offer a number of advantages over electromechanical relay control 
systems. Unlike electromechanical relays, PLCs are not hard – wired to perform 
specific functions. Thus, when system operation requirements change, a 
software program is readily changed instead of having to physically rewire 
relays. In addition, PLCs are more reliable. Faster in operation, smaller in size, 
and can be readily expanded.  
 
General types of fluids. 
 
The first major category of hydraulic fluids is the petroleum-based fluid, which 
is the most widely used type. If the crude oil is quality-refined, it is generally 
satisfactory for light services. However, additives must be include to meet with the 
requirements of good lubricity, high viscosity index and oxidation resistance. Most of 
the desirable properties, if not already present in the petroleum oil, can be obtained 
by the addition of additives. The primary disadvantage of a petroleum- based fluid is 
that it will burn.


--- Page 10 ---

The second category of fluids has been developed: the fire – resistant fluid. 
This greatly reduces the danger of a fire. However, fire – resistant fluid generally 
have higher specific gravity than do petroleum – based fluids. This may cause 
cavitations problems in the pump due to excessive vacuum pressure in the pump 
inlet line unless proper design steps are implemented. Also most fire – resistant 
fluids are more expensive and have more compatibility problems with seal 
materials. Therefore, fire – resistant fluids should be used only if hazardous 
operating conditions exist. Manufacturer’s recommendations should be followed 
very carefully when changing from a petroleum – based fluid to fire – resistant fluid 
and vice versa. Normally, thorough draining, cleaning, and flushing are required. It 
may even be necessary to change seals and gaskets on the various hydraulic 
components. 
 
A third category is the conventional MS (most severe) engine – type oil, 
which provides increased hydraulic system life due to better lubricity. This is due to 
the antiwar additives used to prevent engine wear on cams and valves. This 
improved lubricity also provides wear resistance for the heavily loaded hydraulic 
components such as pumps and valves.  
 
The fourth category of fluid is air itself. Air is the only gas commonly used in 
pneumatic fluid power systems. The reason is that air is inexpensive and readily 
available. One of the significant advantages of air is that it will not burn. Air can 
easily be made clean by the use of a filter, and any leaks are not messy since they 
simply dissipate into the atmosphere. Air can also be made a good lubricant by the 
introduction of a fine oil mist using a lubricator. Also, the use of air eliminates return 
lines since the spent air is exhausted into the atmosphere. Disadvantages of air 
include its compressibility and subsequent sluggishness and lack of rigidity. Finally, 
air can be corrosive since it contains oxygen and water. However most of the water 
can be removed by the use of air dryers. 
 
In summary, the single most important material in a fluid power system is the 
working fluid. No single most important material in a fluid power system is the 
working fluid. No single fluid possesses all the ideal characteristics desired. The 
fluid power designer must select the fluid that comes the closer to being ideal over 
all for a particular application. Only if a fire hazard is present should a fire resistant 
fluid be used. The most expensive fluid is not necessarily the best one to use.


--- Page 11 ---

Properties of Hydraulics fluids 
 
VISCOSITY:

Viscosity is probably the single most important property of a hydraulic fluid. It is 
a measured of the sluggishness with which a fluid moves. When the viscosity is low, 
the fluid flows easily because it is thin and has low body. A fluid that flows with 
difficulty has a high viscosity for a given hydraulic system is a compromise. Too 
high a viscosity results in  
 
1. High resistance to flow, which causes sluggish operation. 
2. Increased power consumption due to frictional losses. 
3. Increased pressure drop through valves and lines. 
4. High temperatures caused by friction. 
 
On the other hand, if the viscosity is too low, the result is  
 
1. Increased leakage losses past seals. 
2. Excessive wear due to breakdown of the oil film between moving parts. These 
parts may be internal components of a pump or even sliding valve spool inside 
its valve body.  
 
 
Viscosity is often expressed in the CGS metric system. In the CGS metric system. 
The units are

2

2
/
. /
/
(
/ )/
T
dyne cm
dyne s cm
v y
cm s
cm




Where a dyne is the force that will accelerate a 1-g mass at a rate of 1cm/s2. 
The conversions between dynes and newton’s and between centimeters (cm) and 
meters (m) are as follows: 
 
 
1N=105 dynes 
 
1m=100cm 
 
A viscosity of 1 dyne’s/cm2 is called a poise. 
 
Calculations in hydraulic systems often involve the use of kinematic viscosity 
rather than absolute viscosity. Kinematic viscosity (v) equals absolute viscosity () 
divided by mass density ():


--- Page 12 ---






Checking units for  in the English system, we have

2
2
2
2
2
2
. /
. /
/
/
/
/
/
dyne s cm
dyne s cm
cm
s
g cm
dyne cm
cm s








Where 1 kilogram (kg) equals 1000 grams (g).  
 
The viscosity of a fluid is usually measured by a sysbolt viscosimeter 
basically, this device consists of an inner chamber containing the sample of oil to be 
tested. A separate outer compartment, which completely surrounds the inner 
chamber, contains a quantity of oil whose temperature is controlled by an electrical 
thermostat and heater. A standard orifice is located at the bottom of the center oil 
chamber. When the oil sample is at the desired temperature, the time it takes to fill 
a 60-cm3 container through the metering orifice is then recorded. The time (t), 
measured in seconds, is the viscosity of the oil in official units called saybolt 
universal seconds (SUS). Since a thick liquid flows slowly, the SUS viscosity will be 
higher than for a thin liquid. 
 
A relationship exists between the viscosity in SUS and the corresponding 
metric system units of centistokes (cS). This relationship is provided by the following 
empirical equations.

195
(
)
0.226
100
        (2-19)
'
135
(
)
0.220
100
        (2-20)
'





v cS
t
t
SUS
t





v cS
t
t
SUS
t

Where the symbol v represents the viscosity in centistokes and t is measured SUS 
or simple seconds. 
 
VISCOSITY INDEX:

The viscosity index (V.I.) of an oil is a number that indicates the effect of 
temperature changes on the viscosity of the oil.  A low V.I.  signifies a  relatively 
 large  change  of  viscosity  with  changes of  temperature.  In other words, the oil 
becomes extremely thin at high temperatures and extremely thick at low 
temperatures. On the other hand, a high V.I.  signifies  relatively  little  change  in 
viscosity  over  a  wide  temperature  range.


--- Page 13 ---

Oxidation  
 
Oxidation which is caused by the chemical reaction of oxygen from the air 
with particles of oil, can seriously reduce the service life of a hydraulic fluid.  
 
 
Corrosion 
 
Corrosion is the chemical reaction between a metal and acid.  The result of 
rusting (or) corrosion is the “eating away” of the metal surfaces of hydraulic 
components. 
 
Flammability 
 
Flammability is defined as the case of ignition and ability to propagate a 
flame.  
 
Flash point 
 
 
The temperature at which the oil surface given off sufficient vapors to ignite 
when a flame is passed over the surface 
 
Fire point  
 
 
The temperature at which the oil will release sufficiency vapour to support 
combustion continuously for fire seconds when a flame is passed over the surface.  
 
Autogenously ignition temperature (AIT) 
 
 
The temperature at which ignition occurs spontaneously.  
 
Neutralization number 
 
 
The neutralization number is a measure of the relative acidity or alkalinity of 
a hydraulic fluid and is specified by a PH factor.

total no.of titrating solution
Neutralization number=
5.61
weight of sample used


Pressure drop 
 
Pressure that was not used directly for doing work is called as pressure drop 
or resistive pressure.  Excessive presume drop results in increased heat generation.  
This pressure drop should be added to the system pressure to calculate overall 
pressure requirements during designing a system.


--- Page 14 ---

Demulsibility. 
 
The property of a hydraulic fluid to separate rapidly and completely from moisture 
and to resist emulsification is known as Demulsibility. 
 
Significance:   This property is significant because the operati0n of many hydraulic 
systems are conductive to the forming of moisture or of stable water-in-oil 
emulsions. 
 
 
Different types of hydraulic fluids 
 
1. Water glycol solutions. This type consists of an actual solution of about 40% 
water and 60% glycol. These solutions have high viscosity index values, but the 
viscosity rises as the water evaporates. The operating temperature range runs 
from -100 F to about 1800 F. Most of the newer synthetic seal materials are 
compatible with water – glycol solutions. However, metals such as zinc, 
cadmium, and therefore should not be used. In addition, special paints must be 
used. 
 
2. Water-in – oil emulsions. This type consists of about 40% water completely 
dispersed in a special oil base. It is characterized by the small droplets of water 
completely surrounded by oil. The water provides a good coolant property but 
tends to make the fluid more corrosive. Thus, greater amounts of corrosion in 
hibitor additives are necessary. The operating temperature range runs form -
200F to about 1750F. As is the case with water – glycol solutions, it is necessary 
to replenish evaporated water to maintain proper viscosity. Water – in – oil 
emulsions are compatible with most rubber seal materials found in petroleum – 
based hydraulic systems. 
 
3. Straight synthetics. This type is chemically formulated to inhibit combustion 
and in general has the highest fire – resistant temperature. Typical fluids in this 
category are the phosphate esters or chlorinated hydrocarbons. Disadvantages 
of straight synthetics include low viscosity index, incompatibility with most 
natural or synthetic rubber seals, and high cost. In particular, the phosphate 
esters readily dissolve paints, pipe thread compounds, and electrical insulation. 
 
4. High – water-content fluids. This type consists of about 90% water and 10% 
concentrate. The concentrate consists of fluid additives that improve viscosity, 
lubricity. Rust protection against bacteria growth. Advantages of high-water-
content fluids include high fire resistance, outstanding cooling characteristics,


--- Page 15 ---

and low cost. Which is about 20% of the cost of petroleum- based hydraulic 
fluids. Maximum operating temperatures should be held to 1200F to minimize 
evaporation. Due to a somewhat higher density and lower viscosity compared to 
petroleum- based fluids. Pump inlet conductors should be sized to keep fluid 
velocities. High –water-content fluids are compatible with most rubber seal 
materials, but leather, paper, or cork materials should not be used since they 
tend to deteriorate in water.

Fluid Power Symbols.     The study of the operation of a hydraulic or pneumatic 
system is more convenient if a diagram of the system or circuit is available.  The 
components in an installation and their connections can be determined from such a 
diagram.

A schematic diagram indicates the functions of the various parts. A schematic 
diagram of a hydraulic system or a pneumatic system is similar to geographical road 
map.  The symbols can be used to trace the action of oil or air through a system.

There are three main groups of symbols:

1. Symbols that are used for both hydraulic and pneumatic devices.

2. Symbols that are used only for hydraulic devices.

3. Symbols that are used only for pneumatic devices.

Lines

-continuous line - flow line

-dashed line - pilot, drain

-Envelope - long and short dashes around two or more 
component symbols.


--- Page 16 ---

Circular

-large circle - pump, motor

-small circle  - Measuring devices

-semi-circle - rotary actuator

Square

-one square  - pressure control function  
-two or three adjacent squares  - directional control

Diamond

-diamond - Fluid conditioner (filter, separator, lubricator, 
heat exchanger)

Miscellaneous Symbols

-Spring

-Flow Restriction

Triangle

-solid - Direction of Hydraulic Fluid Flow

-open - Direction of Pneumatic flow

Pumps and Compressors

Fixed Displacement hydraulic pump

-unidirectional

-bidirectional

Variable displacement hydraulic pump

-unidirectional


--- Page 17 ---

-bidirectional

Compressor

Motors

Fixed displacement hydraulic motor

-unidirectional

-bidirectional

Variable displacement hydraulic motor

-unidirectional

-bidirectional

Pneumatic motor

-unidirectional

-bidirectional

Rotary Actuator

- hydraulic

- pneumatic

Cylinders

Single acting cylinder

-returned by external force


--- Page 18 ---

-returned by spring or extended by spring force

Double acting cylinders

-single piston rod (fluid required to extend and retract)

-double ended piston rod

Cylinders with cushions

- single fixed cushion

- double fixed cushion

- single adjustable cushion

- double adjustable cushion

Directional Control Valves

Directional control valve (2 ports / 2 positions)

-Normally closed directional control valve with 2 ports and 2 finite 
positions.

-Normally open directional control valve with 2 ports and 2 finite 
positions.

Directional control valve (3 ports / 2 positions)

-Normally closed directional control valve with 3 ports and 2 finite 
positions.

-Normally open directional control valve with 3 ports and 2 finite 
positions.

Directional control valve (4 ports / 2 positions)

-directional control valve with 4 ports and 2 finite positions


--- Page 19 ---

Directional control valve (4 ports / 3 positions)

-directional control valve with 4 ports and 3 finite positions 
*-(center position can have various flow paths)

Directional control valve (5 ports / 2 positions) normally a pneumatic 
valve

-directional control valve with 5 ports and 2 finite positions

Directional control valve (5 ports / 3 positions) normally a pneumatic 
valve

-directional control valve with 5 ports and 3 finite positions

Proportional directional control valve

Electro-hydraulic servo valve

-The spool positions on these valves is variable allowing for variable flow 
conditions.

-single-stage direct operation unit which accepts an analog signal and 
provides a similar analog fluid power output

-two-stage with mechanical feedback indirect pilot operation unit 
which accepts an analog signal and provides a similar analog fluid 
power output

Control Methods

Manual Control

-general symbol (without showing the control type)

-pushbutton

-lever


--- Page 20 ---

-foot pedal

Mechanical Control

-plunger or tracer

-spring

-roller

-roller(one direction only)

Electrical Control

-Solenoid (the one winding)

Pilot Operation

-pneumatic

-hydraulic

Pilot operated two-stage valve

-Pneumatic: Sol first stage

-Pneumatic: Air pilot second stage

-Hydraulic: Sol first stage

-Hydraulic: Hyd pilot second stage

Check valves, Shuttle valves, Rapid Exhaust valves

-check valve -free flow one direction, blocked flow in other 
direction

-pilot operated check valve, pilot to close


--- Page 21 ---

-pilot operated check valve, pilot to open

Shuttle valve

-to isolate one part of a system from an alternate part of 
circuit.

Rapid exhaust valve/Pneumatic

-installed close to an actuator for rapid movement of the 
actuator.

Pressure Control Valves

Pressure Relief Valve (safety valve) normally closed

- Line pressure is limited to the setting of the valve, secondary part is 
directed to tank.

Proportional Pressure Relief

- line pressure is limited to and proportional to an electronic signal

Sequence Valve

- When the line pressure reaches the setting of the valve, valve opens 
permitting flow to the secondary port. The pilot must be externally 
drained to tank.

Pressure 
reducing 
valve

- pressure downstream of valve is limited to the setting of the valve


--- Page 22 ---

Flow Control Valves

Throttle valve

-adjustable output flow

Flow Control valve

-with fixed output (variations in inlet pressure do not affect rate of 
flow)

-with fixed output and relief port to reservoir with relief for excess flow 
(variations in inlet pressure do not affect rate of flow)

-with variable output

-fixed orifice

-metered flow toward right free flow to left

-pressure compensated flow control fixed output flow regardless of 
load

-pressure and temperature compensated

-with variable output and relief port to reservoir

Flow dividing valve

-flow is divided equally to two outputs.

Shut-Off Valve

-Simplified symbol

Accumulators


--- Page 23 ---

Filters, Water Traps, Lubricators and Miscellaneous 
Apparatus

Filter or Strainer

Water Trap

-with manual drain

-with automatic drained

Filter with water trap

-with manual drain

-automatic drain

Air Dryer

refrigerant, or chemical removal of water from compressed 
air line

Lubricator

-oil vapor is indicted into air line

Conditioning unit

-compound symbol of filter, regulator, lubricator unit

-Simplified Symbol


--- Page 24 ---

Heat Exchangers

<>  
-air or water cooled unit designed to remove heat from oil 
returning to reservoir

Basics of Hydraulics

Hydraulic Basics

Hydraulics is the science of transmitting force and/or motion through the medium of a confined liquid. 
In a hydraulic device, power is transmitted by pushing on a confined liquid. Figure 1-1 shows a 
simple hydraulic device. The transfer of energy takes place because a quantity of liquid is subject to 
pressure. To operate liquid-powered systems, the operator should have a knowledge of the basic 
nature of liquids. This chapter covers the properties of liquids and how they act under different 
conditions.


--- Page 25 ---

Pascal's Law

Blaise Pascal formulated the basic law of hydraulics in the mid 17th century. He discovered that 
pressure exerted on a fluid acts equally in all directions. His law states that pressure in a confined 
fluid is transmitted undiminished in every direction and acts with equal force on equal areas and at 
right angles to a container's walls.

Figure 1-7 shows the apparatus that Pascal used to develop his law. It consisted of two connected 
cylinders of different diameters with a liquid trapped between them. Pascal found that the weight of a 
small piston will balance the weight of a larger piston as long as the piston's areas are in proportion 
to the weights. In the small cylinder, a force of 100 pounds on a 1-square-inch piston creates a 
pressure of 100 psi. According to Pascal's Law, this pressure is transmitted undiminished in every 
direction. In the larger cylinder, the 100 psi of pressure from the small cylinder is transmitted to an 
area of 5 square inches, which results in a force of 500 pounds on the second piston. The force has 
been multiplied 5 times-a mechanical advantage of 5 to 1. Using the same factors, you can 
determine the distance the pistons move. For example, if the small piston moves down 10 inches, 
the larger piston will move up 2 inches. Use the following to determine the distance:

Where-

F1 = force of the small piston, in pounds  
D1 = distance the small piston moves, in inches  
D2 = distance the larger piston moves, in inches  
F2 = force of the larger piston, in pounds


--- Page 26 ---

Example: Determine D2

The six basic components of a hydraulic system are: 
 
1. Reservoir (or tank), 
2. Pump 
3. Prime mover 
4. Valves 
5. Actuator and 
6. Fluid –transfer piping. 
 
Actuator 
 
 
An actuator is used to convert the fluid energy into mechanical force or 
torque to do useful work. 
 
Differentiate between a liquid and a gas.

Sl.No
Liquid
Gas

Has a definite mass, but does not 
possess a definite volume and 
conforms to the shape of the 
container. 
2 
Incompressible fluid 
Compressor fluid

1 
Posses a definite volume for a 
give mass, but conforms to the 
shape of the container.

3 
It forms a free surface 
It expands and occupies the 
whole volume of the container. 
 
 
 
Applications of Pascal’s law. 
 
1. Braham’s hydraulic press 
2. Air-to-hydraulic pressure booster. 
 
Laminar and Turbulent flow 
 
        A fluid flows through pipe, the layer of fluid at the wall has zero velocity.  This 
is due to viscosity, which causes fluid particles to cling to the wall.  Layers of fluid at 
the progressively greater distances from the pipe surface have higher velocities, 
with the maximum velocity occurring at the pipe centerline.


--- Page 27 ---

Actually there are two basic types of flow in pipes, depending on the nature of 
the different factors that affect the flow.  The first type is called laminar flow, which is 
characterized by the fluid flowing in smooth layers or laminate.  In this type of flow, 
a particle of fluid in a given layer stays in that layer.  This type of fluid motion is 
called streamline flow because all the particles of fluid are moving in parallel paths.  
Therefore, a laminar flow is smooth with essentially no collision of particles.  For 
laminar flow, the friction is caused by the sliding of one layer or particle of fluid over 
another in a smooth continuous fashion. 
 
       If the velocity of flow reaches a high enough value, the flow ceases to be 
laminar and becomes turbulent. In turbulent flow the movement of a particle 
becomes random and fluctuates up and down in a direction perpendicular as well as 
parallel to the mean flow direction.  This mixing action generates turbulence due to 
colliding fluid particles. This causes considerably more resistance to flow and thus 
greater energy losses than that produced by laminar flow. 
        
Reynolds’s Number 
        It is important to know whether the flow pattern inside a pipe is laminar or 
turbulent.  This brings us to the experiments performed by Osborn Reynolds is 1833 
to determine the conditions governing the transaction from laminar to turbulent flow.  
Reynolds allowed the fluid in the large controlled the flow rate by means of a valve 
at the end of the tube.  A capillary tube, connection to a reservoir of dye, allowed 
the flow of a fine jet of dye into the main flow stream. 
 
 
 
Reynolds applied the dimensional analysis on variables and introduced a 
dimensional number called Reynolds number (Re)

Reynolds number, 
VD
VD
Re
v





Where





Density of the liquid,
V= Velocity of flow,

D=Diameter of the pipe,



=Absolute visocity of the fluid, and
v=Kinematic viscosity of the fluid

Reynolds’s number is the basis for determining the laminar and turbulent 
flow. If Re<2000, then the flow is laminar, and if Re> 4000, then the flow is 
turbulent.


--- Page 28 ---

Darcy’s equation  
 
     Friction is the main cause of energy losses in fluid power systems. The energy 
loss due to friction is transferred into heat, which is given off to the surrounding air. 
The result is a loss of potential energy in the system, and   this shows up as a loss 
in pressure or head. The head loss (HL) in a system actually consists two 
components: 
 
1. Losses in pipes 
2. Losses in fittings  
 
        Head losses in pipes can be found by using Darcy’s equation:















2

L
V
H
f
D

2
L
g

Where     f = friction factor (dimensionless) 
               L = length of pipe (m). 
               D = pipe inside diameter (m). 
                V= average fluid velocity (m/s), 
               g = acceleration of gravity (m/s2) 
 
             Darcy’s equation can be used to calculate the head loss due to friction in 
pipes for both laminar and turbulent flow.  The difference between the two lies in the 
evaluation of the friction factor f.  
 
Frictional Losses in Laminar Flow 
 
     Darcy’s equation can be used to find head losses in pipes experiencing laminar 
flow by noting that for laminar flow the friction factor equals the constant 64 divided 
by the Reynolds number:

64

R
f
N


L
V
N
D
g











2
64

HL=

2
R

The following example illustrates the use of the Hagen-Poiseuille equation.


--- Page 29 ---

Frictional Losses in Turbulent Flow  
      Darcy’s equation will be used for calculating energy losses in turbulent fluid flow.  
However, the friction factor cannot be represented by a simple formula as well as 
the case for laminar flow.  This is due to the random and fluctuating movement of 
the fluid particles. 
 
       For turbulent flow, experiments have shown that the friction factor is function of 
not only the Reynolds number but also the relative roughness of the pipe.  The 
relative roughness is defined as the pipe inside surface roughness (Greek letter 
epsilon) divided by the pipe inside diameter D:

Relative roughness E

D

Absolute Roughness

Type of Pipe 
(ft) 
(mm) 
Glass Or Plastic 
Smooth 
Smooth- 
Drawn Tubing 
0.000005 
0.0015 
Commercial Steel 
or wrought Iron 
0.00015 
0.046

Asphalted 
Cast 
Iron 
0.0004 
0.12

Galvanized Iron 
0.0005 
0.15 
Cast Iron 
0.00085 
0.26 
Riveted Steel 
0.006 
1.8 
 
Losses in pipe. 
 
1. Major energy losses 
This loss is due to friction. 
2. Minor energy losses 
These losses are due to: 
 
(i) Losses in valves and pipe fittings. 
(ii) Sudden enlargement/construction of pipe 
(i) 
Bend in pipe, etc. 
 
Losses in Valves and Fittings. 
        In addition to losses due to friction in pipes, there also are energy losses in 
valves and fittings such as tees, elbows, and bends.   
 
For many fluid power applications, the majority of the energy losses occur in 
these valves and fittings in which there is a change in the cross section of the flow 
path and a change in the direction of flow.  Thus, the nature of the flow through 
valves and fittings is very complex.


--- Page 30 ---

As a result, experimental techniques are used to determine losses.  Tests have 
shown that head losses in valves and fittings are proportional to the square of the 
velocity of the fluid:

2

Kv
H
g


2
L

The constant of proportionality (K) is called the K factor of the valve or fitting.   
 
       Illustrations of several common valves and fittings are given as follows: 
 
 
Valve Or Fitting 
K Factor 
 
Globe Valve: Wide  open 
                       ½ open               
Gate Valve: Wide open 
                       ¾ open 
                         ½ open 
                        ¼ open 
 Return Bend 
Standard Tee 
Standard Elbow 
450 Elbow  
900 Elbow 
Ball Check valve

10.0 
12.5 
0.19 
0.90 
4.5 
24.0 
2.2 
1.8 
0.9 
0.42 
0.75 
4.0


--- Page 31 ---

HYDRAULIC SYSTEM & COMPONENTS 
Pumping theory:

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg31_img1_083f31.png]

The main components of a pumping system are: 
• 
Pumps (different types of pumps are explained in section 2) 
• 
Prime movers: electric motors, diesel engines or air system  
• 
Piping, used to carry the fluid 
• 
Valves, used to control the flow in the system 
• 
Other fittings, controls and instrumentation 
End-use equipment, which have different requirements (e.g. pressure, flow) and 
therefore determine the pumping system components and configuration. Examples 
include heat exchangers, tanks and hydraulic machines


--- Page 32 ---

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg32_img1_f39d9a.png]

Pump classification 
 
 
There are two broad classifications of pumps as identified by the fluid power 
industry.  They are described as follows. 
 
 Hydrodynamic or non-positive pumps 
– They are used for low-pressure, high-volume flow applications. 
– Normally their maximum pressure capacity is limited to 250-300 psi.  
 Hydrostatic or positive pumps (Gear, vane, piston pumps)  
– High pressure capability (up to 10,000 psi or higher)  
– Small compact size  
– High volumetric efficiency  
– Small changes in efficiency  
– Great flexibility of performance


--- Page 33 ---

Pumps

Pumps

Dynamic
Positive 
Displacement

Dynamic
Positive 
Displacement

Others (e.g. 
Impulse, Buoyancy)

Others (e.g. 
Impulse, Buoyancy)

Centrifugal
Special effect
Rotary
Reciprocating

Centrifugal
Special effect
Rotary
Reciprocating

Internal 
gear

External 
gear
Lobe
Slide 
vane

Internal 
gear

External 
gear
Lobe
Slide 
vane

1. Hydrodynamic or non positive displacement pumps: 
 
             Examples of this type are the centrifugal (impeller) and axial (propeller) 
pumps in although these pumps provide smooth continuous flow, their flow output is 
reduced as circuit resistance is increased.  In fact, it is possible to completely block 
off the outlet to stop all flow.  Even while the pump is running at design speed.  
These pumps are typically used for low-pressure, high-volume flow applications. 
Since there is a great deal of clearance between the rotating and stationary 
elements, these pumps are not self-priming. This is because there is too much 
clearance space to seal against atmospheric pressure. And thus the displacement 
between the inlet and outlet is not a positive one.  Thus the pump flow rate depends 
not only on the rotational speed (rpm) at which it is driven but also on the resistance 
of the external system. 
 
 
 As the resistance of the external system starts to increase, some of the fluid 
slips back into the clearance spaces, causing a reduction in the discharge flow rate.  
This slippage is due to the fact that the fluid follows the path of least resistance.  
When the resistance of the external system becomes infinitely large (for example. A 
closed valve blocks the outlet line) the pump will produce no flow and thus its 
volumetric efficiency becomes zero. 
 
For example the dramatic drop in volumetric efficiency withy increase in load 
resistance occurs when using a centrifugal pump.  The operation of the centrifugal 
pump is simple.  
 The fluid enters at the center of the impeller and is picked up by the rotation 
impeller.  As the fluid rotates with the impeller, the centrifugal force causes the fluid 
to move radically outward.  This causes the fluid to flow through the outlet discharge


--- Page 34 ---

port of the housing.  One of the interesting characteristics of a centrifugal pump is 
its behavior when there is no demand for fluid.  In devices to prevent pump damage.  
The tips of the impeller blades merely slosh through the fluid, and the rotational 
speed maintains a fluid pressure corresponding to the centrifugal force established. 
The fact that there is no positive internal seal against leakage is the reason that the 
centrifugal pump is not forced to produce flow against no demand.  When demand 
for the fluid occurs (for example, the opening of a valve), the pressure delivers the 
fluid to the source of the demand.  This is why centrifugal pumps are so desirable 
for pumping stations used for delivering water to homes and factories.  The demand 
for water may go to near zero during the evening and reach a peak sometimes 
during the daytime.  The centrifugal pump can readily handle these large changes in 
fluid demand. 
 
Although hydrodynamic pumps provide smooth continuous flow (when a 
demand exist) their output flow rate is reduced as resistance to flow is increased.  
This is shown in where pump pressure is potted versus pump flow. The maximum 
pressure is called the shutoff head because all external circuit valves are closed the 
there is no flow.  As the external resistance decreases, the flow increases at the 
expense of reduced pressure.  Because the output flow changes significantly with 
external circuit resistance, non positive displacement pumps are rarely used in 
hydraulic systems. 
  
2. Hydrostatic or positive displacement pumps: 
 
 
This type of pump ejects a fixed quantity of fluid per revolution of the pump 
shaft. As a result, pump output flow, neglecting the small internal leakage, is 
constant and not dependent on system pressure.  This makes them particularly well 
suited for fluid power systems.  However, positive displacement pumps must be 
protected against overpressure if the resistance to flow becomes very large or 
infinite.  This can happen if a Valve is completely closed and there is no physical 
place for the fluid to go.  The reason for this is that a positive displacement pump 
continues to eject fluid (even through it has no place to go), causing an extremely 
rapid buildup in pressure as the fluid is compressed.  A pressure relief valve is used 
to protect the pump against stored for system use 
 
 
Positive displacement pumps can be classified by the type of motion of 
internal elements.  The motion may be either rotary or reciprocating.  Although 
these pumps come in a wide variety of different designs, there are essentially three 
basic types: 
 
1. Gear pumps (fixed displacement only by geometrical necessity): 
a. External gear pumps 
b. Internal gear pumps 
c. Lobe pumps 
d. Screw pumps


--- Page 35 ---

2. Vane pumps: 
a. Unbalanced vane pumps (fixed or variable displacement) 
b. Balanced vane pumps (fixed displacement)  
3. Piston pumps (Fixed or variable displacement) 
a. Axial design 
b. Radial design 
 
In addition, van pumps can be of the balanced or unbalanced design.  The 
unbalanced design can have pressure compensation capability.  Which 
automatically protects the pump against overpressure.   
  
 
Gear pump

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg35_img85_9c2d4e.png]

External gear pump

Internal gear pump


--- Page 36 ---

An external gear pump which develops flow by carrying fluid between the 
teeth of two meshing gears.  One of the gears is connected to a drive shaft 
connected to the prime mover.  The second gear is driven as it meshes with the 
driver gear.  Oil chambers are formed between the gear teeth, the pump housing, 
and side wear plates.  The suction side is where teeth come out of mesh, and it is 
here where the volume expands, bringing about a reduction in pressure to below 
atmospheric pressure.  Fluid is pushed into this void by atmospheric pressure 
because the oil supply tank is vented to the atmosphere the discharge side is where 
teeth go into mesh, and it is here where the Volume decreases between mating 
teeth.  Since the pump has a positive internal seal against leakage, the oil is 
positively ejected into the outlet port. 
 
The following analysis permits us to evaluate the theoretical flow rate of a gear 
pump using specified nomenclature: 
 
Do = outside diameter of gear teeth (in., .M) 
Di = inside diameter of gear teeth (in., M) 
L = width of gear teeth (in., M) 
VD= displacement volume of pump (inch/rev, m3rev) 
N = rpm of pump 
Qr = theoretical pump flow rate 
 
From gear geometry, the volumetric displacement is found:

2
2
(
)
4
D
o
i
V
D
D L




The theoretical flow rate (in English units) is determined next: 
 
( .3/min)
( .3/
)
(
)
r
D
Q in
V
in
rev
N rpm


 
Since 1 gal = 231 in3, we have

D
V N
Qr gpm 

(
)
231

Using metric units, we have

min
min
D
m
m
rev
Qr
V
N
rev





















3
3

There must be a small clearance (less than 0.001 in.) between the teeth tip 
and pump housing.  As a result some of the oil at the discharge port can leak 
directly back toward the suction. This means that the actual flow rate QA is less than 
the theoretical flow rate Qr, which is based on volumetric displacement and pump 
speed.  This internal leakage, which is called pump slippage, is identified by the 
term volumetric efficiency, which is usually greater than 90% for positive 
displacement pumps, operating at design pressure:


--- Page 37 ---

Q
Q



100
A

T

The higher the discharge pressure, the lower the volumetric efficiency 
because internal leakage increases with pressure.  This shown by the dashed line 
in Fig. pump manufacturers usually specify volumetric efficiency at the pump sure 
below which no mechanical damage due to overpressure will occur to the pump and 
the result will be a long reliable service life.  Too high a pressure not casing and 
overloading the shaft bearings.  This brings to mind once again the need for over 
pressure protection.  Also keep in mind that high pressures occur when a large load 
or resistance to flow is encountered  
 
Vane Pump

 Unbalanced vane pumps 
 Balanced vane pumps 
 
On many industrial installations with a maximum pressure of about 200 
bar, vane pumps are applied.  
 
 
 The rotor, which contains radial slots, is splined to the drive shaft and rotates 
inside a cam ring.  Each slot contains a vane designed to mate with the surface of 
the cam ring as the rotor turns.  Centrifugal force keeps the vanes out against the 
surface of the cam ring.  During one-half revolution of rotor rotation. The volume 
increases between the rotor and cam ring.  The resulting volume expansion causes 
a reduction of pressure. 
This is the suction process, which causes fluid to flow through the inlet port 
and fill the void.  As the rotor rotates through the second half revolution.  The


--- Page 38 ---

surface of the cam ring pushes the vanes back into their slots, and the trapped 
volume is reduced.  This positively ejects the trapped fluid through the discharge 
port. 
 
The following analysis and nomenclature is applicable to the vane pump: 
 
Dc = Diameter of cam ring (in., .M) 
Di = diameter of rotor (in., M) 
L = width of rotor (in., M) 
VD= displacement volume of pump (in3, m3) 
N = rotor rpm 
e = eccentricity (in., m)  
emax= maximum possible eccentricity (in., m) 
VDmad=maximum possible volumetric displacement (in3. M) 
 
From geometry, we can find the maximum possible eccentricity:

c
R
D
D
e



max
2

This maximum value of eccentricity produces a maximum volumetric displacement.

2
2
max
(
)
4
D
c
R
V
D
D
L




Rearranging, we have

max
(
)(
)
4
D
c
R
c
R
V
D
D
D
D
L





Substituting the expression for emax yields

max
max
(
)(2
)
4
D
c
R
V
D
D
e
L




The actual volumetric displacement occurs when emax=e:

(
)
2
D
c
R
V
D
D
eL




Some vane pumps have provisions for mechanically varying the eccentricity.  
Such a design is called a variable displacement pump. A hand wheel or a pressure 
compensator can be used to move the cam ring to change the eccentricity.  The 
direction of flow through the pump can be reversed by movement of the cam ring on 
either side of center. 
 
It is a pressure compensated one in which system pressure acts directly on 
the cam ring via a hydraulic piston on the right side.  This forces the cam ring 
against the compensator spring-loaded piston on the left side of the cam ring.  If the 
discharge pressure is large enough, it overcomes the compensator spring force and 
shift the cam ring to the left.  This reduces the eccentricity, which is maximum when 
discharge pressure is zero. As the discharge pressure continues to increase, zero


--- Page 39 ---

eccentricity is finally achieved, and the pump now becomes zero.  Such a pump 
basically has its own protection against excessive pressure buildup, as shown in fig. 
when the pressure reaches a value called Pcutoff  the compensator spring force 
equals the hydraulic piston force.  As the pressure continues to increase, the 
compensator spring is compressed until zero eccentricity is achieved.  The 
maximum pressure achieved is called Pdeadhead at which point the pump is protected 
because it attempts to produce no more flow. As a result there is no horse power 
wasted and fluid heating is reduced. 
            The internal configuration of an actual pressure compensated vane pump. 
This design contains a cam ring that rotates slightly during use.  Thereby 
distributing wear over the entire inner circumference of the ring. 
            A side load is exerted on the bearings of the vane pump because of 
pressure unbalance.  This same undesirable side load exists for the gear pump 
such pumps are hydraulically unbalanced. 
 
A balanced vane pump is one that has two intake and two outlet ports 
diametrically opposite each other.  Thus pressure ports are opposite each other, 
and a complete hydraulic balance is achieved. One disadvantage of a balanced 
vane pump is that it cannot be designed as a variable displacement unit.  Instead of 
having a circular cam ring, a balanced design vane pump has an elliptical housing, 
which forms two separate pumping chambers on opposite sides of the rotor.


--- Page 40 ---

Piston pumps

 Axial design  
 Radial design

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg40_img1_d76767.png]

 Radial design


--- Page 41 ---

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg41_img1_da73ea.png]

 Axial design  
 
 
 
 
A piston pump works on the principle that a reciprocating piston can draw in fluid 
when it retracts in a cylinder bore and discharge it when it extends.  The basic 
question is how to mechanize a series of reciprocating pistons.  There are two basic 
types of piston pumps. 
 
One is the axial design, having pistons that are parallel to the axis of the cylinder 
block. Axial piston pumps can be either of the bent axis configuration or of the 
swash plate design.  The second type of piston pump is the radial design, which has 
pistons arranged radically in a cylinder block. 
 
An axial piston pump (bent-axis type) that contains a cylinder block rotating 
with the drive shaft.  However, the centerline of the cylinder block is set at an offset 
angle relative to the centerline of the drive shaft. The cylinder block contains a 
number of pistons arranged along a circle.  The piston rods are connected to the 
drive shaft flange by ball and socket joints.  The pistons are forced in and out of 
their bores as the distance between the drive shaft flange and cylinder block 
changes. A universal link connects the block to the drive shaft to provide alignment 
and positive drive.


--- Page 42 ---

The volumetric displacement of the pump varies with the offset angle no 
flow is produced when the cylinder block centerline is parallel to the drive shaft 
centerline.  Can vary from 0 to a maximum of about 30. Fixed displacement 
units are usually provided with 23Or 30 offset angles. 
 
Variable displacement units are available with a yoke and some external 
control to change the offset angle.  
 
The following nomenclature and analysis are applicable to an axial piston pump:

 = offset angle ()  
S = piston stroke (in., m) 
D = piston circle diameter (in., m) 
Y = number of pistons, 
A = piston area (in2. m2) 
 
From trigonometry we have

Tan () = s

D

Or 
 
 
S = D tan () 
 
The total displacement volume equals the number of pistons multiplied by the 
displacement volume preposition: 
 
 
VD = YAS 
Substituting, we have 
 
 
VD = YAD tan () 
From Eq. we obtain upon, substitution and using English units.

tan( )
231
DANY
Q



Similarly, for metric units, we have  
 
 
Q = DANY tan ()


--- Page 43 ---

PUMP PERFORMANCE:

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg43_img1_1ed04a.png]

The performance delivered by a pump is primarily a function of the precision 
of its manufacture.  Components must be made to close tolerances, which must be 
maintained while the pump is operating under design conditions.  The maintenance 
of close tolerances is accomplished by designs that have mechanical integrity and 
balanced pressures. 
 
Theoretically the ideal pump would be one having zero clearance between all 
mating parts.  Although this is feasible, working clearances should be as small as 
possible while maintaining proper oil films for lubrication between rubbing parts. 
 
Pump manufacturers run tests to determine performance data for their 
various types of pumps.  The overall efficiency of a pump can be computed by 
comparing the power available at the output of the pump to the power supplied at 
the input. Overall efficiency can be broken into two distinct components called 
volumetric and mechanical efficiencies.


--- Page 44 ---

1. Volumetric efficiency (
r): volumetric efficiency indicates the amount of leakage

that takes place within the pump. This involves considerations such as 
manufacturing tolerances and flexing of the pump casing under design pressure 
operating conditions:

actual flow rate produced by pump
100
 flow rate pump should produce
u
theoretical



Q
Q 

= 
100
A

T

Volumetric efficiencies typically run from 80% to 90% for gear pumps, 82% to 92% 
for vane pumps, and 90% to 98% for piston pumps. 
 
2. Mechanical efficiency (
m
): Mechanical efficiency indicates the amount of

energy losses that occur due to reason other than leakage.  This includes friction in 
bearings and between other mating parts.  It also includes energy losses due to 
fluid turbulence. Mechanical efficiencies typically run from 90% to 95%.

theoretical powe required to operate pump





m

power delivered to pump

actual
or

pump output power assuming no leakage





m

input power delivered to pump

Using English units and horsepower for power yields.

T
m
PQ
TN




/1714
100
/ 63,000

In metric units, using watts for power,

100
r
m
PQ
TN




P = measured pump discharge pressure (psi, pa) 
Qr = calculated theoretical pump flow rate (gpm, m3/s) 
T = measured input torque in prime mover shaft of pump (in. lb N-m)  
N = measured pump speed (rpm, rad/s) 
Mechanical efficiency can also be computed in terms of torques:


--- Page 45 ---

theoretical powe required to operate pump 100
100
 power delivered to pump

T
actual
T





r
m
A

Equations for evaluating TT and TA are given as follows:




3

V
in
P psi
T in lb

( . )
(
)
( . )
2

D
T



or




3

(
)
(
)
( .
)
2

V
m
P pa
T N m

D
r






supplied to pump
63,000

horsepower
T
N rpm




A

or

power
T
rad
N
s

supplied to pump (W)









A

where

N rpm









rad
2
            N
(
)
s
60

3. Overall efficiency(
)
o

:  The overall efficiency considers all energy losses and is

defined mathematically as follows:

volumetric effeciency
mechanical efficieancy
 efficiency=
100
overall


o
m
A
o
Q
PQ
Q
TN





/1714
100
100
100
100
/ 63,000

1

1

Canceling like terms yields

/1714
 output horse power
100
100
/ 63,000
 input horse power

A
o
PQ
pump
TN
pump





A
o
PQ
pump
TN
pump





output power
100
100
 input power


--- Page 46 ---

HP 
PER 
LB 
RATIO

OVERALL 
EFFICIENCY

SPEED 
RATING 
(RPM)

PRESSURE 
RATING 
(PSI)

FLOW 
CAPACITY 
(GPM)

COST (DOL 
LARS PER HP)

PUMP 
TYPE

(PER CENT)

4-8 
 
 
4-8 
 
 
6-30 
 
6-50 
 
 
5-35

1-150 
 
 
1-200 
 
 
1-80 
 
1-200 
 
 
1-200

2 
 
 
2 
 
 
2 
 
4 
 
 
3

80-90 
 
 
70-85 
 
 
80-95 
 
90-98 
 
 
85-95

1200-
2500 
 
1200-
2500 
 
1200-
1800 
1200-
3000 
 
1200-
1800

2000-3000 
 
 
500-2000 
 
 
1000-2000 
 
2000-12000 
 
3000-12000

EXTERNAL 
GEAR 
 
INTERNAL 
GEAR 
 
VANE 
 
AXIAL 
PISTON 
 
RADIAL 
PISTON

The volumetric efficiency is greatly affected by the following leakage losses which 
can rapidly accelerate due to wear. 
 
1. Leakage around the outer periphery of the gears 
2. Leakage across the faces of the gears 
3. Leakage at the points where the gear teeth make contact. 
 
 
Gear pumps are simple in design and compact in size. Therefore, they are 
the most common type of pump used in fluid power systems. The greatest number 
of application of gear pumps are in the mobile equipment and machine tool fields. 
 
Vane pump efficiencies and costs fall between those of gear and piston 
pumps. Vane pumps have good efficiencies and last for a reasonably long period of 
time. However, continued satisfactory performance necessitates clean oil with good 
lubricity. Excessive shaft speeds can cause operating problems the bronze wear 
plates and the pressure ring. 
 
Piston pumps are the most expensive and provide the highest level of overall 
performance. They can be driven at high speeds (up to 500 rpm) to provide a high 
horse power-to-weight ratio. They produce essentially a non pulsating flow and can 
operate at the highest pressure levels. Due to very close-fitting pistons, they have 
the highest efficiencies. Since no side loads occur to the pistons, the pump life


--- Page 47 ---

expectancy is at least several years.  However, because of their complex design 
piston pumps cannot normally be repaired in the field. 
 
Pump selection 
 Select the actuator (hydraulic cylinder or motor) that is appropriate based on 
the loads encountered. 
 Determine the flow-rate requirements. This involves the calculation of the 
flow rate necessary to drive the actuator to move the load through a specified 
distance within a given time limit.  
 Determine the pump speed and select the prime mover.  
 pump type based on the application  
 Select the system pressure. This ties in with the actuator size and the 
magnitude of the resistive force produced by the external load on the system.  
 Select the reservoir and associated plumbing, including piping, valving, hy-
draulic cylinders, and motors and other miscellaneous components  
 Calculate the overall cost of the system.


--- Page 48 ---

UNIT II: HYDRAULIC ACTUATORS AND CONTROL COMPONENTS 
 
Fluid Power Actuators 
 
A hydraulic actuator is used for converting hydraulic energy into mechanical 
energy. 
 
Classification of hydraulic actuators 
 
1. Linear actuators (also called ‘hydraulic cylinders’), and  
2. Rotary actuators (also called ‘hydraulic motors’).

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg48_img1_bbd923.png]

Hydraulic cylinder (Linear actuators) 
 
The hydraulic cylinder is used to convert fluid power into linear mechanical 
force and motion. 
 
Applications of hydraulic cylinders. 
 
The hydraulic cylinders are basically used for performing work such as 
pushing, pulling, tilting, and pressing in a variety of engineering applications such as 
in material handling equipment, machine tools, construction equipment, and 
automobiles.  
 
Different types of hydraulic cylinders are 
1. single acting cylinders,  
2. Double acting cylinder, 
3. Telescoping cylinders,


--- Page 49 ---

4. Tandem cylinders, and  
5. Through rod cylinder. 
 
Types of Hydraulic Cylinder 
 
Single Acting Cylinders 
 
A single acting hydraulic cylinder is designed to apply force in only one direction. 
 
It consists of a piston inside a cylindrical housing called a barrel. Attached to 
one end of the piston is a rod which extends outside. At the other end (bland end) is 
a port for the entrance and the exit of oil. A single acting cylinder can exert a force 
only in the extending direction, as fluid from the pump enters through the blank end 
of the cylinder. Single acting cylinders do not hydraulically retract. Retraction is 
accomplished by using gravity or by the inclusion of a compression spring at the rod 
end. 
 
Double Acting Cylinders 
 
A double acting cylinder is capable of delivering forces in both directions. The 
barrel is made of seamless steel tubing, honed to a fine finish on the inside surface. 
The piston which is made of ductile iron contains u cup packing’s to seal the 
leakage between the piston and the barrel.  The ports are located in the end caps 
which are secured to the barrel by tie rods. The load of the piston rod at the neck is 
taken by a rod bearing, which is generally made of brass or bronze. A rod wiper is 
provided at the end of the beck to prevent foreign particles and dust from entering 
into the cylinder along with the piston rod. 
 
When the fluid from the pump enters the cylinder through port 1, the piston 
moves forward and the fluid returns to the reservoir from the cylinder through port 2. 
During the return stroke the fluid is allowed to enter the cylinder through port 2 and 
fluid from the other side of the piston goes back to the reservoir through port 1. 
 
Telescoping Cylinders 
 
 
Telescoping cylinders are used where long work-strokes are needed. A 
telescoping cylinder provides a relatively long working stroke for an overall reduced 
length by employing several pistons which telescope into each other.  
           Two stage double acting telescopic cylinder. Fluid for the retraction strokes is 
fed into port ‘A’ and passes through the hollow piston rod into the annulus behind 
the first stage piston. So the first stage piston is forced to the left until it uncovers 
the fluid ports connecting this with the second stage annulus, thereby moving the 
larger piston to the left until both the pistons are fully retracted into the body of the 
cylinder. 
 
Fluid for the extension stroke is then fed through port ‘B’, forcing both pistons 
to the right until the cylinder is fully extended.


--- Page 50 ---

Cylinder cushioning

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg50_img1_e4562a.png]

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg50_img2_39a246.png]

As long as the piston is moving in the middle range of the cylinder, nothing 
will hit the piston head. But due to the inertia forces of the moving parts at the end 
of the piston travel, the piston will hit the cylinder head at full speed. 
 
To overcome this, the designers provide a ‘cushioning’ arrangement by 
which the hydraulic cylinder can be slowly retarded or cushioned, during the last 
portion of the stroke. 
 
The piston at the start of the cushioning action. In this position, the fluid from 
the pump enters into the rod end of the cylinder moving the piston towards the left. 
The fluid from the head end of the cylinder flows freely to the reservoir through the 
fluid port. 
 
As the stroke nears completion, the cushion nose starts entering in the space 
of the cylinder head. Due to the taper front of the cushion nose, the fluid port path 
(c) is gradually closed. So the fluid cannot flow through ‘c’ or through the passage 
(x) due to the presence of the check valve. Now the entrapped fluid can escape only 
through passage(y), the size of which can be controlled by a needle valve. Thus 
due to the restricted outflow during the last portion of the stroke, the piston


--- Page 51 ---

decelerates slowly. By adjust6ing the needle valve, rate of deceleration is 
controlled. 
 
 
For starting the forward stroke of the piston, the fluid is allowed to enter the 
fluid port. The fluid will now flow from all passages. Thus, the full piston area will be 
subjected to the system pressure. 
 
Control components 
 
Directional control valves 
 
 
As the name implies, directional control valves are used to control the 
direction of flow in a hydraulic circuit.  The simplest type is a check valve which is in 
reality a one-way directional control valve.  It is a one –way valve because it permits 
free in one direction and prevents any flow in the opposite direction.   
 
Check valves 
 
 
The internal operation of a check valve. , a light spring holds the poppet in 
the closed position.  In the free-flow direction, the fluid pressure overcomes the 
spring force at about 5 psi.  If flow is attempted in the opposite direction, the fluid 
pressure pushes the poppet (along with the spring force) in the closed position.  
Therefore, no flow is permitted.  The higher the pressure, the greater will be the 
force pushing the poppet against its seat. Thus, increased pressure will not result in 
any tendency to allow flow in the no-flow direction. 
 
 
The free-flow direction implied when using the symbolic representation of a 
check valve.  This symbol, which clearly shows the function of a check valve, will be 
used when drawing total hydraulic circuits.  Note that a check valve, will be used 
when drawing total hydraulic circuits.  Note that a check valve is analogous to a 
diode in electric circuits. 
  
Pilot operated check valve 
 
 
A second type of check valve is the pilot- operated check valve, with its 
symbol.  This type of check valve always permits free flow in one direction but 
permits flow in the normally blocked opposite direction only of pilot pressure is 
applied at the pilot pressure port of the valve.  In the design the check valve poppet 
has the pilot piston attached to the threaded poppet stem by a nut.  The light spring 
holds the poppet seated in a no-flow condition by pushing against the pilot piston.  
The purpose of the separate drain port is to prevent oil from crating a pressure 
buildup on the bottom of the piston.  The dashed line represents the pilot pressure 
line connected to the pilot pressure port of the valve.  Pilot check valves are 
frequently used for locking hydraulic cylinders in position.


--- Page 52 ---

Two way and four way valves 
 
Additional types of directional control valves are the two-way and four-way 
valves used to direct inlet flow to either of two outlet ports.  Flow entering at the 
pump port P (this is the port that is connected to the pump discharge line) can be 
directed to either the outlet port A or B.  Most direction control valves use a sliding 
spool to change the path of flow through the valve Pg a given position of the spool, 
a unique flow path configuration exists within the valve. Directional control valves 
are designed to operate with either two position of the spool or three positions of the 
spool. The flow path configuration for the unique spool position is shown 
symbolically by a rectangle, sometimes called envelop.  Therefore, the valves are 
two-position valves (the graphical symbols show two side-by-side rectangles for 
each valve). 
 
1. Two-way valve: Notice that the flow can go through the value in two unique ways 
depending on the spool position.  
 
a. spool position I: Flow can go from P to B as shown by the straight through line 
and arrowhead.  Ports A and T are blocked as shown.   
 
b. Spool position 2: Flow can go from P to A.  Notice that the ports are labeled for 
only one envelope so that the reader must mentally identify the ports. 
 
 
Two – way valves can be used to direct pump flow to either of two different 
part of a circuit, Four-way valves are typically used to control double-acting 
hydraulic cylinders.  The spool of a directional control valve can be positioned 
manually, mechanically, by using pilot pressure, or by using electrical solenoids.   
 
 
 
A physical understanding of the flow path configuration of two-way and four-
way valves is provided by Figs, respectively.  Notice that a spool is a cylindrical 
member that has large-diameter lands machined to slide in a very close- fitting bore 
of the valve body.  The radial clearance is usually less than 0.001 in.  The grooves 
between the lands provide the flow passages between ports.  
 
Four-way valve that is spring offset.  In this case the lever shifts the spool, 
and the spring returns the spool to its original position when the lever is released.  
There are only two unique operation positions, as indicated by the graphical symbol.  
Notice that the ports are labeled at the envelope representing the neutral (spring 
offset or return) or unactuated position of the spool.    
     The directional control valves are manually actuated by the use of a lever.  A 
two-position, four-way spring offset valve that is mechanically rather than manually 
actuate.  This is depicted in the cut-away view, with the spool end containing a roller 
that is typically actuated by a cam-type mechanism.  Notice that the basic graphical


--- Page 53 ---

symbol is the same by that actuation is depicted as being mechanical rather than 
manual. 
 
Directional control valves can also be shifted by applying air pressure against 
a piston at either end of the valve spool, springs (located at both ends of the spool) 
push against centering washers to center the spool when no air is applied. When air 
is introduced  
          Through air is introduced through the left end passage, its pressure pushes 
against the piston to shift the spool to the right.  Removal of this left end air supply 
and introduction of air through the right end passage caused the spool to shift to the 
left.  Therefore, this is a four-qay, three-position, spring-centered, air pilot-actuated 
directional control valve.   
 
A very common way to actuate a spool valve is by using a solenoid, when 
the electric coil (solenoid) is energized, it creates a magnetic force that pulls the 
armature into the coil.  This causes the armature to push on the push rod to move 
the spool of the valve.  
This valve has a flow capacity of i2 gpm and a maximum operating pressure of 
3500 psi.  It has a wet armature solenoid.  Which means that the plunger or 
armature of the solenoid moves in a tube that is open to the tank cavity of the valve. 
The fluid around the armature serves to cool it and cushion it’s stoke without 
appreciable affecting response time.  There are no seals around this armature to 
wear or restrict its movement.  This allow all the power developed by the solenoid to 
be transmitted to the valve spool without having to overcome seal friction.  Impact 
loads, which frequently cause premature solenoid failure, are eliminated with this 
construction. This valve has a solenoid at each of the Spool.  Specifically, it is a 
solenoid-actuated, four-way, three-position, spring centered directional control valve  
  
 
Solenoids are commonly used to actuate small spool valves.  This three-way 
valve is specially designed to be used with small cylinders and other similar devices 
requiring low flow rates. 
 
 
Most three-position valves have a variety of possible flow path 
configurations.  Each four-way valve has identical flow path configuration in the 
actuated positions but different spring-centered flow paths.   
 
Shuttle valve 
 
 
A shuttle valve is another type of directional control valve.  It permits a 
system to operate from either of two fluid power sources.  One application is for 
safety in the event that the main pump can no longer provide hydraulic power to 
operate emergency devices.  The shuttle valve will shift to allow fluid to flow from a 
secondary backup pump.  A shuttle valve consists of a floating piston that can be 
shuttle to one side or the other of the valve depending on which side of the piston 
has the greater pressure.  Shuttle valves may be spring loaded in one direction to 
favor one of the supply sources or unbiased so that the direction of flow through the 
valve is determined by circuit conditions. A shuttle valve is essentially a direct-acting


--- Page 54 ---

double-check valve with a cross- bleed.  As shown by the double arrows on the 
graphical symbol, reverse flow is permitted. 
 
Pressure Control Valves 
 
The most widely used type of pressure control valve is the pressure relief 
valve, since it is found in practically every hydraulic system.  It is a normally closed 
valve whose function is to limit the pressure to a specified maximum value by 
diverting pump flow back to the tank.   
           A poppet is held seated inside the valve by a heavy spring.  When the 
system pressure reaches high enough value, the poppet is forced off its seat. This 
permits flow through the outlet to the tank as long as this high pressure level is 
maintained.  Notice the external adjusting screw, which varies the spring force and, 
thus, the pressure at which the valve begins to open (cracking pressure). 
 
It should be noted that the puppet must open sufficiently to allow full pump 
flow.  The pressure that exists at full pump flow pump flow can be substantially 
greater than the cracking pressure. Where system pressure is plotted versus flow 
through the relief valve.  
 
            Does not accept any flow, then all the pump flow must return back to the 
tank via the relief valve.  The pressure relief valve provides protection against any 
over loads experienced by the actuators in the hydraulic system.  Of course.  A 
relief valve is not needed if a pressure-compensated vane pump is used.  Obviously 
one important function of a pressure relief valve is to limit the force or torque 
produced by hydraulic cylinders and motors. 
 
 
A compound pressure relief valve is one that operates in two stages. The 
pilot stage is located in the upper valve body and contains a pressure limiting 
poppet that is held against a seat by an adjustable spring.  The lower body contains 
the port connection.  Diversion of the full pump flow is accomplished by the 
balanced piston in the lower body. 
 
 
The operation is as follows: In normal operation, the balanced piston is in 
hydraulic balance.  Pressure at the inlet port acts under the piston and also on its 
top, because an orifice is drilled the large land.  For Pressures less than the valve 
setting, the piston is held on its seat by a light spring.  As soon as pressure reaches 
the setting of the adjustable spring, the poppet is force off its seat.  This limits the 
pressure in the upper chamber.  The restricted flow through the orifice and into the 
upper chamber results in an increase in pressure in the lower chamber.  This 
causes an unbalance in hydraulic forces, which tends to raise the piston off its seat.  
When the pressure difference in hydraulic forces, which tends to raise the piston off 
its seat.  When the pressure difference between the upper and lower chambers 
reaches approximately 20psi, the large piston lifts off its seat to permit flow directly 
to the tank.  If the flow increases through the valve.  The piston lifts farther off its 
seal.  However, this compresses only the light spring, and hence very little override 
occurs.  Compound relief valves may be remotely operated by using the outlet port


--- Page 55 ---

from the chamber above the piston.  For example, this chamber can be vented to 
tank via a solenoid directional control valve.  When this valve vents the pressure 
relief to the 20-psi pressure in the bottom chamber overcomes the light spring and 
unloads the pump to the tank. 
 
 
Pressure-reducing valve.  
                       This type of valve (which is normally open) is used to maintain 
reduced pressures in specified locations of hydraulic systems.  It is actuated by 
downstream pressure and tends to close as this pressure reaches the valve setting.  
The operation of a pressure-reducing valve that uses a spring-loaded spool to 
control the downstream pressure. If downstream pressure is below the valve 
setting, fluid will flow freely from the inlet to the outlet.  Notice that there is an 
internal passageway from the outlet, which transmits outlet pressure to the spool 
end opposite the spring.  When the outlet (downstream) pressure increases to the 
valve setting, the spool moves to the right to partially block the outlet port, as shown 
in view B. just enough flow is passed to the outlet to maintain its preset pressure 
level.  If the valve closed completely. Leakage past the spool could cause 
downstream pressure to build up above the valve setting.  This is prevented from 
occurring because a continuous bleed to the tank is permitted via a separated drain 
line to the tank.  . 
 
 
An additional pressure control device is the unloading valve.  This valve is 
used to permit a pump to build up to an adjustable pressure setting and then allow I 
to discharge to the tank at essentially zero pressure as long as pilot pressure is 
maintained on the valve from a remote source.  Hence, the pump has essentially no 
load and no load is therefore developing a minimum amount of horsepower.  This is 
the case in spite of the fact that the pump is delivering a full pump flow because the 
pressure is practically zero.  This is not the same with a pressure relief valve 
because the pump is delivering full pump flow at the pressure relief valve setting 
and thus is operating at maximum horsepower condition.    
 
 
 
Sequence valve 
                          It is designed to cause a hydraulic system to operate in a pressure 
sequence.  After the components connected to port A have reached the adjusted 
pressure of the sequence valve, it passes fluid through port B to do additional work 
in a different portion of the system.  The high-flow poppet of the sequence valve is 
controlled by the spring –loaded cone.  Flow entering at port A is blocked by the 
poppet at low pressures.  The pressure signal at A passes through orifices to the 
topside of the poppet and to the cone. There is no flow through these sections until 
the pressure rises at A to the maximum permitted by the adjustable set spring 
loaded cone.  When the pressure at A reaches that Value, the main poppet lifts 
passing flow to port B.  it maintains the adjusted pressure at port A until the 
pressure at B rises


--- Page 56 ---

To the pressure A, the control piston seats and prevents further pilot flow loss.  The 
main poppet opens fully and allows the pressure at A and B to rise to higher values 
together.  Flow may go either way t this time. The spring cavity of the control cone 
drains externally from port Y, generally to the tank.  This sequence valve may be 
remotely controlled from vent port X.  
 
Counterbalance valve.  
                           The purpose of a counterbalance valve is to maintain control of a 
vertical cylinder to prevent it from descending due to gravity.  The primary port of 
this valve is connected to the bottom of the cylinder, and the secondary port is 
connected to a directional control valve. (DCV). the pressure setting of the 
counterbalance valve is somewhat higher than is necessary to prevent the cylinder 
load from falling.  As shown in Dig. (a), when pup flow directed (via the DCV) to the 
top of the cylinder, the cylinder piston is push downward.  This causes pressure at 
the primary port to increase to raise the spool.  This opens a flow path for discharge 
through the secondary port to the DCV back to the tank, when raising the cylinder 
an integral check valve opens to allow free flow for retracting the cylinder.  
 
Flow Control Valves 
 
Flow control valves are used to regulate the speed of hydraulic cylinders and 
motors controlling the flow rate to these actuators.   
            They may be a simple as a fixed orifice or an adjustable needle valve.  
Needle valves are designed to give fine control of flow in small – diameter piping.  , 
their name is derived from their sharp, pointed conical disk and matching seat.   
 
 The stem has several color rings, which, in conjunction with a numbered 
knob, permits reading of a given valves opening as shown.  Charts are available 
that allow quick determination of the controlled flow rate for given valve settings and 
pressure drops.  A locknut prevents unwanted changes in flow 
 
There are two basic types of flow control valves: non pressure-
compensated and pressure-compensated. The non pressure –compensated type 
is used where system pressures are relatively constant and motoring speeds are 
not too critical.  They work on the principle that the flow through an orifice will be 
constant if the pressure drop remains constant.    
 
If the load on an actuator changes significantly, system pressure will change 
appreciable.  Thus, the flow rate through a non pressure-compensated valve will 
change for the same flow rate setting.  This design incorporates a hydrostat that 
maintains a constant 20-psi differential across the throttle, which is an orifice whose 
area can be adjusted by an external knob setting.  The orifice area setting 
determines the flow rate to be controlled.  The hydrostat is held normally open by a 
light spring.  However, it states to close as inlet pressure increases and overcomes 
the light spring force.  This closes the opening through the hydrostat and thereby 
block off all flow in excess of the throttle setting.  
 
            An actual pressure-compensated flow control valve, which has a pressure 
rating of 3000 psi. Pressure compensation will maintain preset flow within 1 to5%


--- Page 57 ---

depending on the basic flow rate as long as there is 150-psi pressure differential 
between the inlet and outlet ports.  The dial is calibrated for easy and repeatable 
flow setting.  Adjustments over the complete valve capacity of 12 gpm are obtained 
within a 2700 arc.  A dial key lock prevents tampering with valve settings.  A sharp-
edged orifice design means that the valve is immune to temperature of fluid 
viscosity changes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accumulators 
 
 
 
1. Weight – loaded, or gravity, type 
 
2. Spring-loaded type 
 
3 Gas –loaded type 
 
 
The weight-loaded type is historically the oldest.  This type consists of a 
vertical, heavy-wall steel cylinder, which incorporates a piston with packing to 
prevent leakage.  A dead weight is attached to the top of the piston the force of 
gravity of the dead weight provides the potential energy in the accumulator.  This 
type of accumulator creates a constant fluid pressure throughout the full volume 
output of the unit regardless of the rate and quantity of output.   
           In the other types of accumulators, the fluid output pressure decreases as a 
function of the volume output of the accumulator.  The main disadvantage of this 
type of accumulator is its extremely large size and heavy weight, which makes it 
unsuitable for mobile equipment.

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg57_img1_a78a1e.png]


--- Page 58 ---

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg58_img1_0035a1.png]

A spring-loaded accumulator is similar to the weight-loaded type except that 
the piston is preloaded with a spring, the spring is the source of energy that acts 
against the piston, forcing the fluid into the hydraulic system.  The pressure 
generated by this type of accumulator depends on the size and preloading of the 
spring.  In addition, the pressure exerted on the fluid is not a constant.  The spring-
loaded accumulator typicality delivers a relatively small volume of oil at low 
pressures.  Thus, they tend to be heavy and large for high-pressure, large-volume 
systems.  This type of accumulator should not be used for application requiring high 
cycle rates because the spring will fatigue and lose it elasticity.  The result is an 
inoperative accumulator.  
 
 
Gas-loaded accumulators (frequently called hydro pneumatic accumulators) 
have been found to be more practical than the weight-and spring –loaded types. 
The gas-loaded type operates in accordance with Boyle’s law of gases, which 
states that for a constant temperature process, the pressure of a gas varies in verily 
with its volume.  Thus, for example, the gas volume of the accumulator would be cut 
in half if the pressure were doubled.  The compressibility of gases accounts for the 
storage of potential energy.  This energy forces the oil out of the accumulator when


--- Page 59 ---

the gas expands due to the reduction of system pressure when, for example, an 
actuator rapidly moves a load. 
 
Gas-loaded accumulators fall into two main categories: 
 
 
1.Nonsparator type 
 
2.Separator type 
 
 
 
The nonseparator type consists of a fully enclosed shell containing an oil port 
on the bottom and a gas charging valve on the top the gas is confined in the top and 
the oil at the bottom of the shell. There is no physical separator between the gas 
and oil, and thus the gas pushes directly on the oil.  The main advantage of this 
type is its ability to handle large volumes of oil.  The main disadvantage is 
absorption of the gas in the oil due to the lack of a separator.  This type must be 
installed vertically to keep the gas confined at the top of the shell.  This type is not 
recommended for use with high-speed pumps because the entrapped gas in the oil 
could cause cavitations and damage to the pump.  Absorption of gas in the oil also 
makes the oil compressible, resulting in spongy operation of the hydraulic actuators. 
 
 
The commonly accepted design of gas-loaded accumulator is the separator 
type.  In this type there is a physical barrier between the gas and the oil.  This 
barrier effectively utilizes the compressibility of the gas.   
           The three major classifications of the separator accumulator are  
 
1. Piston type 
2. Diaphragm type 
3. Bladder type  
 
Piston Type 
 
 
 
The piston type consists of a cylinder containing a freely floating piston with 
proper seals, the piston serves as the barrier between the gas and oil.  A threaded 
lock ring provided a safety feature, which prevents the operator from disassembling 
the unit while it is precharged.  The main disadvantages of the piston type are that 
they are expensive to manufacture and have practical size limitation. Piston and 
seal friction may also be a problem in low-pressure systems.  Also, appreciable 
leakage tends to occur over a long period of time, requiring frequent precharging.  
Piston accumulators should not be used as pressure pulsation dampeners or shock 
absorbers because of the inertia of the piston and the friction of the seals.  The 
principal advantage of the piston accumulator is its ability to handle very high or low 
temperature system fluids through the utilization of compatible O-ring seals.  
 
A piston –type accumulator that has a safety seal feature.  This unique 
design concept permits the end cap O-rings to lose their pressure seal through a 
limited degree of housing deformation should pressures exceed safe operating


--- Page 60 ---

limits and before fracture can occur.  A specially designed end cap with a split-ring 
locking arrangement prevents the pressure within the accumulator from dislodging 
the end caps. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diaphragm-type accumulator 
                                           The diaphragm-type accumulator consists of a 
diaphragm, secured in the shell, which serves as an elastic barrier between the oil 
and gas A shutoff button, which is secured at the base of the diaphragm, covers the 
inlet of the line connection when the diaphragm is fully stretched.  This prevents the 
diaphragm from being pressed into the opening during the precharge period.  On 
the gas side, the screw plug allows control of the charge pressure and charging of 
the accumulator by means of a charging and testing device.  The hydraulic pump 
delivers oil into the accumulator and deforms the diaphragm.  As the pressure 
increases, the volume of gas decreases, thus storing hydraulic energy.  In the 
reverse case, where additional oil is required in the circuit, it comes from the 
accumulator as the pressure drops in the system by a corresponding amount.  The 
primary advantage of this type of accumulator is its small weight to volume ratio, 
which makes it suitable almost exclusively for airborne applications. 
 
 
A bladder-type accumulator contains an elastic barrier (bladder) between the 
oil and gas, as illustrated in Fig.  The bladder is fitted in the accumulator by means 
of a vulcanized gas-valve element and can be installed or removed through the 
shell opening at the poppet valve.  The poppet valve closes the inlet when the 
accumulator bladder is fully expanded.  This prevents the bladder from being 
pressed into the opening.  A shock- absorbing device protects the valve against 
accidental shocks during quick opening.  The greatest advantage of this types of 
accumulator is the positive sealing between the gas and oil chambers.  The light 
weight bladder provides quick pressure response for pressure regulating, pump 
pulsation, and shock-dampening applications.   
 
 
The hydraulic pump delivers oil into the accumulator and deforms the 
bladder.  As the pressure increases, the volume of gas decreases, thus storing 
hydraulic energy.  In the reverse case, where additional oil is required in the circuit, 
it comes from the accumulator as pressure drops in the system by a corresponding 
amount.    
 
 
An actual bladder-type accumulator, which contains the following features: 
 
1. The gas valve is integrally molded in the separator bag. 
2. The spring-loaded poppet valve maintains the bag inside the shell.  This 
increases volumetric efficiency. 
3. There is a drain plug for bleeding air from the system.


--- Page 61 ---

One of the most common applications of accumulators is an auxiliary power 
source.  The purposed of the accumulator in this application is to store oil delivered 
by the pump during a portion of the work cycle.  The accumulator then releases this 
stored oil upon demand to complete the cycle, thereby serving as a secondary 
power source to assist the pump.  In such a system where intermittent operations 
are performed, the use of an accumulator results in being able to use a smaller-
sized pump.  
 
 
A second application for accumulators is as a compensator for internal or 
external leakage during an extended period of time during which the system is 
pressurized but not in operation. The contacts on the pressure switch then open to 
automatically stop the electric motor that drives the pump.  The accumulator then 
supplies leakage oil to the system during a long period of time.  Finally, when 
system pressure drops to the minimum pressure setting of the pressure switch, it 
closed the electrical circuit of the pump motor until the system has been recharge. 
The use o an accumulator as a leakage compensator saves electrical power and 
reduces heat in the system.  
 
In some hydraulic systems, safety dictates that a cylinder be retracted even 
though the normal supply of oil pressure is lost due to a pump or electrical power 
failure.  Such an application requires the use of an accumulator as an emergency 
power source, a solenoid actuated three way valve is utilized in conjunction with the 
accumulator.  When the three-way valve is energized, oil flows to the bland end of 
the cylinder and also through the check valve into the accumulator and rod end of 
the cylinder.  The accumulator charges as the cylinder extends.  If the pump fails 
due to an electrical failure, the solenoid will de-energize, shifting the valve to its 
spring offset mode.  Then the oil stored under pressure is forced from the 
accumulator to the rod end of the cylinder.  This retracts the cylinder to its starting 
position.  
 
 
One of the most important industrial applications of accumulators is the 
elimination or reduction of high-pressure pulsations or hydraulic shock.  Hydraulic 
shock (or water hammer, as it is frequently called) is caused by the sudden 
stoppage or deceleration of a hydraulic fluid flowing at relatively high velocity in a 
pipeline.  This hydraulic shock creates a compression wave at the source, where 
the rapidly closing valve is located. This compression wave travels at the speed of 
sound upstream to the end of the pipe and back again, causing an increase in the 
line pressure.  This wave travels back and forth along the entire pipe length until its 
energy is finally dissipated by friction.  The resulting rapid pressure pulsation or 
high-pressure surges may cause damage to the hydraulic system components.  
The pressure pulsation or high-pressure surges can be suppressed.  In this 
application the accumulator serves as a shock-suppressing device. 
 
Application of accumulation


--- Page 62 ---

An automotive power-steering example of a mechanical-hydraulic servo 
system (closed-loop system).  Operation is as follows: 
 
1. The input or command signal is the tuning of the steering wheel.  
2. This move the valve sleeve, which ports oil to the actuator (steering cylinder) 
3. The piston rod moves the wheels via the steering linkage. 
4. The valve spool is attached to the linkage and thus move with it.  
 
Intensifier circuit:  
 
An intensifier is a device which converts low pressure fluid power into high 
pressure fluid power intensifiers are used to multiply forces when a great force is 
needed for a relatively short distance.  Hydraulic presses, riveting machines and 
spot-welders are typical application.  
 
 
An intensifier consist of two cylinders of different sizes having a common 
piston.  Oil is admitted under pressure to the bigger cylinder and exerts a force on 
the larger end of the piston. The smaller end of the piston exerts the same force on 
the hydraulic fluid in the smaller cylinder in the intensifier chamber.  Since the area 
of the high pressure end of the piston in the intensifier is smaller than that of the low 
pressure end of the piston, the pressure exerted by the smaller piston is increased 
or intensified.  
 
 
P0 = Pressure exerted on large or operating end of the piston  
 
P1= Pressure exerted by the small end of the piston  
 
A0 = Area of the large end of the piston  
 
A1 = Area of the small end of the piston  
 
P0.A0 = Pi.Ai

Pi = (P0.A0)/Ai 
 
Intensifier ration = Pi/P0 = A0/Ai 
 
Intensifier Press Circuit 
 
 
This circuit is used for the punch-press application.  When the direction 
control valve (DCV) is shifted to the left position, the oil flows to the rod end of the 
cylinder.  So one the pressure builds-up, the pilot signal opens the check valve and 
retraction of the cylinder occurs.   
 
 
When the DCV is shifted to the right mode, the oil flow to the blank of the 
cylinder, through the check valve.  When the pressure in the cylinder reaches the 
sequence valve pressure setting, the intensifier stats to operate.  The pressure is 
intensified and the high pressure output of the intensifier closes the check valve and 
pressurizes the blank end of the cylinder to perform the punching operation.  
 
 
The intensifier should be installed near the cylinder to keep the high pressure 
lines as short as possible.


--- Page 63 ---

Regenerative Circuit 
 
 
A regenerative circuit is used to speed up the extending speed of a double 
acting hydraulic cylinder.  Both ends off the hydraulic cylinder are connected in 
parallel so that one port of the four way valve is blocked. 
 
 
When the DCV is shifted to its left mode, the fluid by passes the DCV and 
enters into the rod end of the cylinder.  Fluid in the blank end drains back to the tank 
through the DCV as the cylinder retracts. 
 
 
When the DCV is shifted into its left mode, the cylinder extends.  The speed 
of extension is grater for a regular double acting cylinder.   
 
Extending speed  
The equation for the extending speed can be obtained as 
follows.  The total flow rate (Qr) entering the blank end of the cylinder equals the 
pump flow rate (Qp) plus the regenerative flow rate (Qr) coming from the rod end of 
the cylinder.




Q
Q
Q

r
p
R

solving for the pump flow.
Q




Q
Q

r

r
R




Q

But
A
V

r

p
EXT




Q  = (A
)

A
V

R
p

R
EXT

where A = Rod Area,A = Piston area, V
= Extending speed

R
p
EXT












Q  = (A
)
(A
)

V
A
V

p
p
p

EXT
R
EXT

A

V

R

EXT



/

V
Q
A

EXT
p
R

So the extending speed is equal to the pump flow rate divided by the area of the 
rod.  Thus a small rod area provides a large extending speed.  
 
Speed Ratio

Q
V
A
A



p
RET

Retracting speed

(
)

p
R






/

Q
A
A
A
V
V
Q
A
A
A

p
R
p
R
EXT

(
)

RET
p
p
R
R

Upon futher simplification

A
V
V
A

p
EXT

=
-1

RET
R


--- Page 64 ---

In general, the grater the ration of piston area to rod area, the grater is the 
ratio of extending speed to retracting speed.  When the piston area equals two 
times the rod area, the extension and retraction speeds are equal.  
 
Load carrying capacity 
In accordance with Pascal’s law, the same system 
pressure is acting on both sides of the piston during the extension stroke.












F
(
)
(
)

p
p
R
A
P
A
A
P

load

= A

P

R

So the load carrying capacity of a regenerative cylinder during extension is 
less than that obtained from a regular double acting cylinder.  The carrying capacity 
for a regenerative cylinder equals the product of the pressure and the piston rod 
area rather than the pressure and the piston area.  Thus due to the regenerative 
cylinder the extension speed is increased at the expense of the lo0ad carrying 
capacity. 
 
Synchronizing Circuits 
 
 
Many times in hydraulic machines, some object or platform is to be lifted with 
the help of two or more hydraulic cylinders simultaneously.  In such cases it 
becomes absolutely necessary that both the cylinders move in unison.  
 
There are many ways of synchronizing the mechanical motions of the actuators.  
 
Tie cylinders: Cylinders tied together for mechanical synchronization are perhaps 
the most advantageous in action.  This arrangement works well on heavy 
equipment when the mechanical linkage is rigid.  Rack and pinion connections are 
good if the mesh is proper and backlash is not present.  This method id limited to 
cylinders which move in the same direction.  
        Fluid from the pump is delivered to the blank end of cylinder 1 and fluid from 
the rod end of the cylinder 1 is delivered to the blank end of the cylinder2.  Fluid 
returns to the tank from the rod end of cylinder 2 via the DCV.  Thus the cylinders 
are hooked in series.   
 
 
For the two cylinders to be synchronized the piston area of cylinder 2 must 
be equal to the difference between areas of piston and rod for cylinder 1.





i.e.,

A
A
A
A

p
p
p
R

2
1

i
i

force euqtion are
(
)

The





PA
P A
A
F

1
2
1

p
p
R

1
1

i





(
)

P A
P A
A
F

2
3
2

p
p
R

2
2
2


--- Page 65 ---

Adding both equation, we note that 
2
1
3
and that P
0
i
p
p
R
A
A
A



(due to the 
drain line to the tank)

1
1
1
2
p
P A
F
F


 
 
 
So, the pump must be capable of delivering a pressure equal to that required 
for the piston of cylinder 1 to overcome the loads acting on both the cylinders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT III 
PNEUMATIC SYSTEMS COMPONENTS

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg65_img1_96b950.png]


--- Page 66 ---

Applications of the Pneumatics system 
• 
Operation of system valves for air, water or chemicals 
• 
 Operation of heavy or hot doors 
• 
 Unloading of hoppers in building, steel making, mining and chemical 
industries 
• 
 Ramming and tamping in concrete and asphalt laying  
• 
 Lifting and moving in slab molding machines 
• 
 Crop spraying and operation of other tractor equipment 
• 
 Spray painting 
• 
 Holding and moving in wood working and furniture making 
• 
 Holding in jigs and fixtures in assembly machinery and machine tools 
• 
 Holding for gluing, heat sealing or welding plastics 
• 
 Holding for brazing or welding 
• 
 Forming operations of bending, drawing and flattening 
• 
 Spot welding machines 
• 
 Riveting 
• 
 Operation of guillotine blades 
• 
 Bottling and filling machines 
• 
 Wood working machinery drives and feeds 
• 
 Test rigs 
• 
 Machine tool, work or tool feeding 
• 
 Component and material conveyor transfer 
• 
 Pneumatic robots 
• 
 Auto gauging 
• 
 Air separation and vacuum lifting of thin sheets 
• 
 Dental drills 
 
 
 
Components of air


--- Page 67 ---

Properties of air 
 
 
Air is actually a mixture of gases containing about 21% of oxygen, 78% 
nitrogen, and 1% other gases such as argon and carbon dioxide. The preceding 
percentage values are based on volume. Air also contains up to 4% water vapor 
depending on the humidity. The percent of water vapor in atmospheric air can vary 
constantly from hour to hour even at the same location. 
 
 
The earth is surrounded by a blanket of air called the atmosphere. Because 
air has weight, the atmosphere exerts a pressure at any point due to the column of 
air above that point. The reference point is sea level, where the atmosphere exerts 
a pressure of 14.7 psi (101 kPa) the atmospheric pressure decreases with altitude. 
For the region up to an altitude of 20,000 ft (6.1 Km), the relationship is nearly 
linear, with a drop in pressure of about 0.5 psi per 1000-ft change in altitude (11 kPa 
per km) 
 
 
When making pneumatic circuit calculations, atmospheric pressure of 14.7 
psiis used as a standard. The corresponding standard weight density value of air is 
0.0752 Ib/ft3 at 14.7 psi and 68oF (11.8N/m3 at 101 kPa abs and 200C). Perfect gas 
laws, the density of a gas depends not only on its pressure but also on its 
temperature. 
 
Air is not only readily compressible, but its volume will vary to fill the vessel 
containing it because the air molecules have substantial internal energy and are at 
a considerable distance from each other. This accounts for the sensitivity of density 
changes with respect to changes in pressure and temperature.

Nitrogen
Oxygen
Carbon Dioxide
Argon
Nitrous Oxide
Water Vapor


--- Page 68 ---

Free air is considered to be air at normal atmospheric conditions. Since 
atmospheric pressure and temperature vary from day to day, the characteristics of  
free air vary accordingly. Thus, when making pneumatic circuit calculations, the 
term standard air is used.  
           Standard air is sea-level air having a temperature of 68oF, a pressure of 14.7 
psia (200C and 101 kPa) abs), and a relative humidity of 36%. 
 
Circuit calculations dealing with volume and pressure changes of air must be 
performed using absolute pressure and absolute temperature values.  
 
absolute pressure (psia) = gage pressure (psig) + 14.7   
 
absolute pressure (Pa abs)=gage pressure (Pa gage)+101.000 
 
absolute temperature (R0) = temperature (0F) + 460     
 
absolute temperature (0K) = temperature (0C) + 273   
 
 
The units of absolute temperature in the English system are degrees 
Rankine, abbreviated oR. A temperature of 0oR (-4600F) is the temperature at which 
all molecular motion ceases to exist and the volume and pressure of a gas 
 
theoretically become zero. The units of absolute temperature in the metric system 
are kelvins, abbreviated K.  we note that a temperature of 0K (absolute zero) equals 
– 2730C. 
 
Perfect gas laws  
 
During the sixteenth century, scientists discovered the laws that determine 
the interactions of pressure, volume and temperature of a gas. These laws are 
called the perfect gas laws because they were derived on the basis of a perfect gas. 
Even though perfect gases do not exist, air behaves very closely to that predicted 
by Boyle’s law, Charles’ law, Gay-Lussac’s law, and the general gas law for the 
pressure and temperature ranges experienced by pneumatic systems. Each of 
these laws (for which absolute pressure and temperature values must be used) is 
defined and applied to a particular problem as follows. 
 
 
Boyle’s law states that if the temperature of a given amount of gas is held 
constant, the volume of the gas will change inversely with the absolute pressure of 
the gas:

V
P
             
                10-3
V
P




1
2

2
1

Boyle’s law is demonstrated by the cylinder piston system , the air in the 
cylinder is compressed at constant temperature from volume V1 to V2 by increasing


--- Page 69 ---

the force applied to the piston from F1 to F2. Since the volume decreases, the 
pressure increases, as depicted by the pressure gage. 
 
 
Charles’ law states that if the pressure on a given amount of gas is held 
constant, the volume of the gas will change in direct proportion to the absolute 
temperature:

V
T
V
T


1
1

2
2

Charles’ law is demonstrated by the cylinder-piston system, the air in the 
cylinder is heated while the piston rod is supporting at W. Since the weight 
maintains a constant force on the piston, the pressure shown constant and the 
volume increases. 
 
Compressors 
 
A compressor is a machine that compresses air or another type of gas from a 
low inlet pressure (usually atmospheric) to a higher desired pressure level. This is 
accomplished by reducing the volume of the gas.  
           Air compressors are generally positive displacement units and are either of 
the reciprocating piston type or the rotary screw or rotary vane types. Such a design 
contains pistons sealed with piston rings operating in precision-bored close-fitting 
cylinders. Notice that the cylinders have air fins to help dissipate heat. Cooling is 
necessary with compressors to dissipate the heat generated during compression.                         
          When air is compressed it picks up heat as the molecules of air come closer 
together and bounce off each other at faster and faster rates. Excessive 
temperature can damage the metal components as well as increase input power 
requirements. Portable and small industrial compressors are normally air-cooled, 
whereas larger units must be water-cooled.

NUMBER OF

PRESSURECAPACITY

STAGES

(PSI) 
1 
2 
3 
4

150 
500 
2500 
5000 
Pneumatic systems typically involve a source of compressed air being 
controlled by valves and causing output devices such as cylinders to operate in a 
controlled way. 
The compressed air is typically obtained from a COMPRESSOR, which is 
usually driven by an electric motor or an internal combustion engine.. 
Air is routed through pipes to VALVES which control the routing of the 
compressed air. Valves may be operated by a range of ACTUATORS including 
levers, rollers and solenoids.


--- Page 70 ---

The air is then passed on to cylinders which convert the energy in the 
compressed air into linear motion and do useful work. 
Finally, the used compressed air is released into the atmosphere as 
EXHAUST.During the course of the above, the compressed air may pass through 
filters and lubricators to clean the air and add lubricant to ensure that equipment 
has a long and reliable working life. It may also pass through regulators to control 
the amount of pressure available in the system.  
 
 
Filters(F) Regulators(R), Lubricators(L), Mufflers & Air dryers

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg70_img1_826bf6.png]

F.R.L.   
 
 
FR + L  
 
 
F  
 
R

Symbol         
 
                              Filter Regulator Lubricator


--- Page 71 ---

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg71_img1_c565c7.png]

The purpose of fluid conditioners is to make air a more acceptable fluid 
medium for the pneumatic system as well as operating personnel. Fluid conditioners 
include filters, regulators, lubricators, mufflers and air dryers. 
 
 
The function of a filter is to remove contaminants from the air before it 
reaches pneumatic components such as valves and actuators. Generally speaking 
in-line filters contain filter elements that remove contaminants in the 5-m cellulose 
felt, reusable, surface-type elements. These elements have gaskets molded 
permanently to each to prevent air bypass and make element servicing foolproof. 
These elements have a large ratio of air to filter media and thus can hold an 
astonishing amount of contamination on the surface without suffering significant 
pressure loss. The baffling system used in these filters mechanically separates 
most of the contaminants collected in the bowl from reentering the air stream. 
 
 
The compressor control system maintains system air pressure within a given 
range. For example, the compressor may automatically start when the pressure 
drops to 100psi and automatically stop when the pressure in the receiver reaches


--- Page 72 ---

125 psi. This is generally accomplished with pressure switches, and a relief valve is 
used to protect the system if the compressor fails to shut down when required. 
 
 
So that a constant pressure is available for a given pneumatic system 
pressure regulator is used.A pressure regulator that use spring-loaded diaphragm 
and features balanced valves for superior regulation characteristics. Large main 
valve seats and precisely positioned aspirator tube provide for excellent flow 
characteristics and minimal pressure drop. The relationship between the diaphragm, 
valve size, and valve travel assure the controlling and maintaining of secondary 
pressures whether for circuit requirements, safety, or energy-saving needs. Units 
are provided with gage ports on both front and back, and either port can be used as 
an additional regulated outlet. Maintenance is easily performed when required 
without removing regulators from the air line. The regulator contains an adjustable 
upper spring, which allows the valve to hold a given pressure on the downstream 
side. The force of the spring is set for the required downstream pressure. This force 
holds the valve open until downstream pressure, acting on the diaphragm, starts to 
exceed the spring force. As a result, the push rod is allowed to move up and the 
spring-loaded valve at the bottom begins to close to throttle the air supply to the 
controlled pressure side.  
 
 
A lubricator ensures proper lubrication of internal moving parts of pneumatic 
components. The operation of a lubricator, which inserts every drop of oil leaving 
the drip tube, as seen through the sight dome, directly into the airstream. These 
drops of oil are transformed into an oil mist prior to their being transported 
downstream. This oil mist consists of both coarse and fine particles. The coarse 
particles may travel distances 0f 20ft or more, while the fine particles often reach 
distances as great as 300ft from the lubricator source. 
 
a) A pneumatic indicator that provides a two-color, two-position visual indication of 
air pressure. The rounded lens configuration provides 180o view of the indicator 
status, which is a fluorescent signal visible from the front and side. This indicator is 
easily panel-mounted using the same holes as standard electrical pilot lights. 
However, they are completely pneumatic, requiring no electrical power. 
 
 
These pneumatic indicators are field adjustable for either one input with 
spring return or two inputs with memory. This memory does not require continuous 
pressure to maintain its last signal input. Field conversion may be made to select 
either single-input, spring return, or two-input maintained modes of operation. By 
using the same adjustment, either of the two display colors and its individual input 
may be selected for single-input operation. In the center position, this adjustment 
allows the indicator to accept two inputs for a maintained (memory) mode of 
operation. If both inputs are on simultaneously, the indicator will assume in 
intermediate position and show parts of both colors.


--- Page 73 ---

A pneumatic exhaust silencer (muffler) is used to control the noise caused by 
a rapidly exhausting airstream flowing into the atmosphere. The increased use of 
compressed air in industry has created a noise problem. Compressed air exhausts 
generate high-intensity sound energy, much of it in the same frequency ranges as 
normal conversation. Excessive exposure to these noises can cause loss of hearing 
without noticeable pain or discomfort. Noise exposure also causes fatigue and 
lowers production. It blocks out warning signals, thus causing accidents. This noise 
problem can be solved by installing a pneumatic silencer at each pneumatic 
exhaust port.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Air from the atmosphere contains varying amounts of moisture in the form of 
water vapor. Compressors do not remove this moisture. Cooling of compressed air 
in piping causes condensation of moisture, much of which is eventually carried 
along into air-operated tools and machines. Water washes away lubrication,

ISO SYMBOLS for AIR TREATMENT EQUIPMENT

Air Cleaning and Drying

Heat 
  Exchanger
Air Cooler

Air 
Heater

Auto Drain
Air Dryer

Refrigerated

Air Dryer

Water 
Separator

Filter

Filter / 
Separator

Filter / 
Separator 
 w. Auto Drain

Multi stage

Lubricator

Micro Filter

Pressure Regulation

Regulator

Basic 
Symbol

Differential

Pressure 
Gauge

Adjustable

Pressure 
Regulator

with relief

Pressure 
Regulator

Setting

Spring

Units

FRL Unit, 
simplified

FRL Unit, detailed


--- Page 74 ---

causing excessive wear and decreased efficiency. In addition, the temperature of 
the compressed air in piping causes condensation of moisture, much of which is 
eventually carried along into air-operated tools and machines. Water washes away 
lubrication, causing excessive wear and decreased efficiency. In addition, the 
temperature of the compressed air discharge from virtually all air compressors 
should be reduced to approximately 100oF before entering the piping system. If an 
aftercooler is placed immediately downstream of a compressor, it will remove most 
of the moisture. An aftercooler is essential to reduce the air temperature to 
convenient levels and to act as a first stage in the removal of moisture prior to 
entering an air dryer. An aftercooler that is installed in the air line between the 
compressor and the air receiver. Water flow is opposite to air flow with internal 
baffles to provide proper water velocity and turbulence for high heat transfer rates. 
After passing through the tubes, the cooled air enters the moisture separating 
chamber. 
 
 
Air Control Valves 
 
Air control valves are used to control the pressure, flow rate, and direction of 
air in pneumatic circuits. Pneumatic pressure control valves are air line regulators 
that are installed at the inlet of each separate pneumatic circuit.  
           As such, they establish the working pressure of the particular circuit. 
Sometimes air line regulators are installed within a circuit to provide two or more 
different pressure levels for separate portions of the circuit. The desired pressure 
level is established by the T-handle, which exerts a compressive force on the 
spring. The spring transmits a force to the diaphragm, which regulates the opening 
and closing of the control valve. This regulates the air flow rate to establish the 
desired downstream pressure. 
          A photograph of a pneumatic shuttle valve that automatically selects the 
higher of two input pressures and connects that pressure to the one output port and 
employs a free-floating spool with an open-center action. At one end of the spool’s 
travel, it connects one input with the output port. At the other end of its travel, it 
connects the second input with the output port. 
 
When a pressure is applied to an input port, the air shifts the spool and then 
moves through the sleeve ports and out the output port. When the pressure is 
removed from the input port, the air in the output port exhausts back through the 
shuttle valve and out one of the input ports. It normally exhausts out the input port 
through which it entered, but there is no guarantee and it may excess of the other. If 
a single is applied to the second input port, a similar action takes place. 
 
 
Quick Exhaust Value 
 
When the air is feed to the piston side of the cylinder, the air in the rod-end 
side of the cylinder can be exhausted to the atmosphere quickly by using a special 
valve. This valve is called a quick-exhaust valve. Here, the air flowing to the cylinder 
from the direction control valve will pass to P port of the quick exhaust valve and 
from the P port, it will pass to the A port of the quick exhaust through A and R to the


--- Page 75 ---

atmosphere without traveling through A and R to the atmosphere without traveling 
through the P port and thus avoids the direction control valve as it normally 
happens. Thus the resistance to piston movement is eliminated to some extend and 
the speed of the cylinder is accelerated proportionately by that amount of less 
resistance. 
 
The Time delay valve consists of an inbuilt air reservoir, an in-built non-return 
flow control valve and a pilot controlled spring return 3 way 2 position direction 
control valve. This valve is used in the pneumatic system to initiate a delayed 
signal. 
 
When the compressed air is supplied to the port P of the valve, it is 
prevented from flowing to port A from P as this is blocked by the spring actuated 
spool. Air is accumulated in an in-built reservoir of the valve from the pilot control 
port Z, the control passage of the same being controlled by the needle of the in-built 
throttle valve. Pressure starts building up here. When the pressure needed to push 
the spool is built-up in the reservoir, the pilot spool of the 3/2 direction control valve 
shifts, thus opening port P of the main valve to A and closing R. The time required 
to built-up the pressure in the reservoir, is the amount of delay time offered by the 
time delay valve. With further increases of pressure, the in-built check valve opens, 
the air from the reservoir gets exhausted and the valve spool returns to its original 
position. 
 
Shuttle valve 
 
 
A shuttle valve consists of a valve body and a synthetic ball or a cuboids 
valving element moving inside the bore in the valve housing. There are three 
opening P1, P2 and A. If an air signal is fed to port P1, the ball moves, closing port 
P2 and air passes to A. If the air is fed to port P2 port P1 closed and air moves to A. 
If air is fed simultaneously to port P1 and P2 then air moves to A either from P1 or 
P2 form both. This element is also called an OR GATE. 
 
Service unit (Air preparation unit): 
 
 
In pneumatic systems a moisture separator, a pressure regulator a pressure 
indicator, a lubricator and a fitter are all frequently required. This need is so 
common that combined devices called service unit are available. 
 
Pneumatic Actuators 
 
 
Pneumatic systems make use of actuators in a fashion similar to that of 
hydraulic systems. However, because air is the fluid medium rather than hydraulic 
oil, pressures are lower, and hence pneumatic actuators are of lighter construction. 
For example, air cylinders make extensive use of aluminum and other nonferrous 
alloys to reduce weight, improve heat transfer characteristics and minimize 
corrosive action of air.


--- Page 76 ---

Internal construction features of a typical double acting pneumatic cylinder. 
The piston uses wear-compensating, pressure-energized U-cup seals to provide 
low-friction sealing and smooth chatter-free movement of this 200-psi pressure-
rated cylinder. The end plates use ribbed aluminum alloy to provide a positive 
leakproof cushion with check valve action, which reverts to free flow upon cylinder 
reversal. The cushion adjustment, which uses a tapered self-locking needle at each 
end, provides positive control over the stroke, which can be as large as 20 in. 
           A rotary index table driven by a double-acting pneumatic cylinder. The inlet 
pressure can be adjusted to provide exact force for moving the load and to prevent 
damage in case of accidental obstructions. A rack and gear drive transmits the 
straight-line motion of the air cylinder to the rotary motion with full power throughout 
its cycle. Through the use of different cams, the table can be indexed in 90o, 60o, 
45o, 30o or 15o increments. 
 
 
Pneumatic rotary actuator, which is available in five basic models to provide 
a range of torque outputs from 100 to 10,000 in. Ib using 100-psi air. Standard 
rotations are 94o, 184o and 364o. The cylinder heads at each end serve as positive 
internal stops for the enclosed floating pistons. The linear motion of the piston is 
modified into rotary motion by a rack and pinion made of hardened steel for 
durability. 
 
 
Rotary air motors can be utilized to provide a smooth source of power. They 
are not susceptible to overload damage and can be stalled for long periods of time 
without any heat problems. They can be started and stopped very quickly and with 
pressure regulations and metering of flow can provide infinitely variable torque and 
speed. 
 
 
The equations for determining the output torque and power for air motors are 
identical to those used for hydraulic motors. However, because air is compressible, 
the accuracy of these equations is not as good for air motors as for hydraulic 
motors. For example, the speed of an air motor decreases significantly as the lad 
torque increases. In addition, the air-consumption rate (scfm) increases at the same 
air motor speed with increased pressure.  
 
 
PNEUMATIC CIRCUIT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
 
 
When analyzing or designing a pneumatic circuit, the following four important 
considerations must be taken into account: 
 
1. Safety of operation 
2. Performance of desired function 
3. Efficiency of operation 
4. Costs


--- Page 77 ---

Safety of operation means that an operator must be protected by the use of 
build-in emergency stop features as well as safety interlock provisions that prevent 
unsafe, improper operation. Although compressed air is often quiet, it can cause 
sudden movements of machine components. These movements could injure a 
technician who, while troubleshooting a circuit, inadvertently opens a flow control 
valve that controls the movement of actuator. 
 
Performance of the desired function must be accomplished on a repeatable 
basis. Thus, the system must be relatively insensitive to adverse conditions such as 
high ambient temperatures, humidity, and dust. Shutting down a pneumatic system 
due to failure or misoperation can result in the stoppage of a production line. 
Stoppage can result in very large costs, especially if the downtime is long due to 
difficulty in repairing the pneumatic system involved. 
 
Efficiency of operation and costs are related design parameters. A low-
efficiency compressor requires more electrical power to operate, which increases 
the system operating costs. Although atmospheric air is ‘free,” compressed air is 
not. Yet if a pneumatic system leaks air into the atmosphere without making 
significant noise, it is often ignored, because the air is clean. On the other hand, a 
hydraulic leak would be fixed immediately, because it is messy and represents a 
safety hazard to personnel walking in the vicinity of the leak. 
 
 
Pneumatic circuit air losses through various leakage areas with a combined 
area of a 0.25-in-diameter hole would equal about 70 scfm for an operating 
pressure of 100 psig. Examples of such leakage areas include the imperfect sealing 
surfaces of improperly installed pipe fittings. A typical cost of compressing air to 100 
psig is about $0.35 per 1000 ft3 of standard air. Therefore, it costs about $0.35 to 
compress 1000 ft3 of standard air. Therefore, it costs about $0.35 to compress 1000 
ft3 of air from 14.7 psig to 100 psig. Thus, the yearly cost of such a leaking 
pneumatic system operating without any downtime is

3

3
$0.35
60min
24
365
70
1000
min
1
1
1
ft
hr
days
ft
hr
day
yr






Yearly cost

= 4 12,900/yr 
 
 
Another cause of increased operating costs is significantly undersized 
components such as pipes and valves. Such components cause excessive 
pressure losses due to friction. As a result the compressor must operate at much 
higher output pressure, which requires greater input power. Of course, greatly 
oversized components result in excessive initial installation costs along with 
improved operating efficiencies. Thus, a compromise must be made between higher 
initial costs with lower operating energy costs and lower initial costs with higher 
operating energy costs based on the expected life of the pneumatic system.


--- Page 78 ---

BASIC PNEUMATIC CIRCUITS 
 
 
In this section we present a number of basic pneumatic circuits utilizing 
pneumatic components that have been previously discussed. Pneumatic circuits are 
similar to their hydraulic counterparts. One difference is that no return lines are used 
in pneumatic circuits because the exhausted air is released directly into the 
atmosphere. This is depicted by a short dashed line leading from the exhaust port of 
each valve. Also, no input device (such as a pump in a hydraulic circuit) is shown, 
because most pneumatic circuits use a centralized compressor as their source of 
energy. The input to the circuit is located at some conveniently located manifold, 
which leads directly into the filter-regulator-lubricator (FRl) unit. 
  
 
A simple pneumatic circuit, which consists of a three-way valve controlling a 
single-acting cylinder. The return stroke is accomplished by a compression spring 
located at the rod end of the cylinder. When the push-button valve is actuated, the 
cylinder extends. It retracts when the valve is deactivated. Needle valves V1 and V2 
permit speed control of the cylinder extension and retraction stroked, respectively. 
 
 
Notice that control of a double-acting cylinder requires a DCV with four 
different functioning ports (each of the two exhaust ports perform the same 
function). Thus a four-way valve has four different functioning ports. In contrast, the 
control of a single-acting, spring-return cylinder requires a DCV with only three 
ports. Hence a three-way valve has only three ports. 
 
Actuation of the push-button valve extends the cylinder. The spring offset 
mode causes the cylinder to retract under air power.

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg78_img1_2e312e.png]


--- Page 79 ---

Mini Pneumatic Circuits

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg79_img1_2b0b43.png]


--- Page 80 ---

Pneumatic Vacuum Systems. 
 
 
When we think of the force caused by a fluid pressure acting on the surface 
area of an object, we typically envision the pressure to be greater than atmospheric 
pressure. However, there are a number of applications where a vacuum air 
pressure is used to perform a useful function. Industrial applications where a 
vacuum form pressure is used include materials handling, clamping, sealing, and 
vacuum forming. 
 
 
In terms of materials-handling applications, a pneumatic vacuum can be 
used to lift smoothly objects that have a flat surface and are not more than several 
hundred pounds in weight. Examples of such objects include glass plates, sheet 
metal, sheets of paper, and floor-covering materials, such as ceramic tile and 
sheets of linoleum. The weight limitation is due to the fact that the maximum suction 
pressure equals 1 atm of pressure in magnitude. 
 
 
 
Materials-handling application where a vacuum cup (sometimes called 
a suction cup) is used to establish the force capability to lift a flat sheet. The cup is 
typically made of a flexible material such as rubber so that a seal can be made 
where its lip contacts the surface of the flat sheet. 
 
 
A vacuum pump (not shown) is turned on to a remove air from the cavity 
between the inside of the cup and top surface of the flat sheet. As the pressure in 
the cavity falls below atmospheric pressure, the atmospheric pressure acting on the 
bottom of the flat sheet pushed the flat sheet up against the lip of the cup. This 
action results in vacuum pressure in the activity between the cup and the flat sheet 
that causes an upward force to be exerted on the flat sheet. The magnitude of this 
force can be determined by algebraically summing the pressure forces on the top 
and bottom surfaces of the flat sheet.







11-4

atm
o
suction
i
F
P
A
P
A

F = the upward force the suction cup exerts on the

where

flat sheet (Ib, N),



P
 
 pressure in absolute units

the atmospheric

atm

(psia, Pa, abs)



A
 the area of the outer circle of the suction cup lip

o

o
D
in
m





2
2
2

= 
. ,
4

Do       = the diameter of the suction cup lip outer circle (in.. m) 
Psuction = the suction pressure inside the cup cavity in absolute units (psia,  
 
 
Pa, abs) 
Ai        = the area of the inner circle of the suction cup lip


--- Page 81 ---

o
D
in
m


= 


2
2
2
 
. ,
4

Di        = the diameter of the suction cup inner lip circle (in., m) 
 
 
Notice the atmospheric pressure on the top and bottom surfaces of the flat 
sheet cancel out away from the outer area of the cup lip. 
 
 
Because Patm / P vacuum is a ratio, it is dimensionless. Thus, any desired units 
can be used fpr Patm and Pvacuum as long as the units are the same and are absolute. 
For example, inches of mercury absolute could also be used for both pressures 
instead of using psia or pascals absolute. Thus, for example, if Patm is five times as 
large as Pvacuum, the pressure ratio will equal 5 no matter what units are used, as 
long as they are the same units and are absolute. 
 
Discrete Control Logic 
1. Pneumatic circuits 
Low forces 
- Discrete, fixed travel distances 
- Rotational or reciprocating motion

1
2

1
2

10

10

8

8

3
4

3
4

6

6

5

5

9

9

7

7

Supply Side

Supply Side

Usage Side

Usage Side

5

5

6

6

4

4

1

1

2
3

2
3

Main components: compressor, valves, cylinders


--- Page 82 ---

Pneumatic components: cylinders

2

double -acting

spring-return

•

air supply

vent to atmosphere (air discharge) 
 
Pneumatic components: valves

a 3/2 valve
a 5/2 valve


--- Page 83 ---

valve actuation

return spring
pneumatic

push button
foot pedal

solenoid (electrical)
roller (mechanical)

Simple Pneumatic control

A
-
+

Start

A+
A-

•

VA

•

•

START, A+, A-


--- Page 84 ---

UNIT IV FLUIDICS & PNEUMATICS CIRCUIT DESIGN 
 
Fluidics :

Fluidics or Fluidic logic is the use of a fluid to perform analog or digital operations 
similar to those performed with electronics.

The physical basis of fluidics is pneumatics and hydraulics, based on the theoretical 
foundation of fluid dynamics. The term Fluidics is normally used when devices have 
no moving parts, so ordinary hydraulic components such as hydraulic cylinders and 
spool valves are not considered or referred to as fluidic devices. The 1960s saw the 
application of fluidics to sophisticated control systems, with the introduction of the 
fluidic amplifier.

Basic Fluidic Devices. 
These are basic fluidic devices. BASIC FLIP-FLOP, FLIP-FLOP WITH 
START UP REFERENCE, SRT FLIP-FLOP, OR/NOR, EXCLUSIVE-OR, and 
AND/NAND.

Reset

Q a

Set

Q b

Reset

Q a

Q b

Set

 Both circuit are the same 
 The only feedback path is the red line


--- Page 85 ---

Introduction to Electro Hydraulic Pneumatic logic circuits

Electrically and pneumatically operated Valves

Air operated valves may be operated in rest

pressure
no pressure

Solenoids are never operated in rest

Mechanically operated Valves

No valve with index "1" is operated.

pressure

no pressure

a…n1
a…n1

All valves with index "0" are operated.

pressure

no pressure

a…n 0

a…n 0


--- Page 86 ---

PLC applications in fluid power control:

Last stroke of the cycle
C

First stroke of the cycle

B

A

A+
A-

B+
B-

C

POWER Level

LOGIC Level

Memories,
AND's, OR's,
Timings etc.

Start

SIGNAL INPUT Level

Codes: a   , a   , b    , b   , c      and c   .
1
0
1
0
1
0


--- Page 87 ---

Programmable Logic Controllers 
PLC Basics: 
 
computer +  relays 
 
STEP 1: 
 
Write this logic into a PROGRAM  
STEP 2: 
 
Load program into PLC 
STEP 3: 
 
Connect the sensor output to External Input terminal.  
STEP 4: 
 
Connect the PLC External Output Terminal to Warning Light 
STEP 5: 
 
EXECUTE the logic program on the PLC. 
 
Programming language: LADDER LOGIC

I:0/1
O:0/1

If                                     then


--- Page 88 ---

robot
to PLC Output: 1
warning bulb

Sensor output, 
connected to 
PLC Input: 1

Sensor output, 
connected to 
PLC Input: 2

inner pressure 
sensitive mat

to PLC Output: 2

outer pressure 
sensitive mat

Outer mat ON  warning light ON  
Inner mat ON  warning light ON  
AND Robot OFF  
Stepping away from inner mat  Manually switch robot ON  
 
 
PLC: example 2 
Two actuators: Warning light, Robot master switch 
LOGIC for Warning light

I:0/1
O:0/1

I:0/2


--- Page 89 ---

PLC: example 2 
LOGIC for Robot 
Robot must STAY OFF until manual reset to ON

I:0/1
O:0/1

Legend:

I:0/2

I:0/1 connected to Outer Mat Switch

I:0/2
B1

I:0/2 connected to Inner Mat Switch

I:0/3

I:0/3 connected to Push Button for 
         robot reset

B1

O:0/1 connected to warning light

B1
O:0/2

I:0/2

O:0/2 connected to robot

ladder diagrams 
Ladder Logic Programs 
Switch (Relay) naming conventions 
 
Lecture notes (Rockwell™ Automation PLC): 
 
External inputs: I:0/1, I:0/2, …, I:1/1, I:1/2, … I:n/m 
 
External outputs: O:0/1, O:0/2, …, O:1/1, O:1/2, … O:n/m 
 
Internal Relays: B0, B1, … 
etc. 
 
Lab (SMC™ PLC): 
 
External inputs: X0, X1, … 
 
External outputs: Y0, Y1, …, 
 
Internal Relays: R0, R1, … 
etc. 
Ladder Logic: Timers 
Solenoid actuated door-lock  
Solenoid ON  Door unlocked  
Solenoid actuated when:


--- Page 90 ---

(i)  ON signal from number-pad outside door 
 
(ii) ON signal from door-open switch inside door  
Solenoid ON for 5 sec, then OFF

T4: 1
I:0/1
O:0/1

Legend:

DN

I:0/2

I:0/1  Number Pad Signal to open door

O:0/1

I:0/2  Push Button signal to open door

O:0/1 Solenoid to unlock door

O:0/1

EN
Timer:
T4: 1

DN

0.01
500
0

Base:

Preset:

Accum:


--- Page 91 ---

Ladder Logic: Timers -- reset 
Solenoid actuated when: 
 
(i)  ON signal from number pad outside door 
 
(ii) ON signal from door-open switch inside door  
Solenoid ON for 5 sec, then OFF  
During ON, if button is pressed, 
 
Timer resets to PRESET  
During ON, light indicator is ON 
LEGEND: 
I:0/1  door-open 
I:O/2  card-reader 
O:0/1  solenoid 
O:0/2  light indicator


--- Page 92 ---

T4: 1
I:0/1
O:0/1

DN

I:0/2

O:0/1

O:0/1

EN
Timer:
T4: 1

DN

0.01
500
0

Base:

Preset:

Accum:

O:0/1
O:0/2

T4: 1
I:0/2

RESET

Programming a PLC 
(1) Hand held console (direct feed of program into PLC 
2) Computer-interface: 
 
(i) Complete the program on a computer 
 
(ii) Test the program on PC 
 
(iii) Upload the program to the PLC processor memory (persistent) 
 
(iv) Connect external Inputs and Outputs 
 
(v) Run the program on PLC


--- Page 93 ---

Operation cycle of PLC

Phase 2

Phase 1

Phase 3

00

00

01

Program 
Memory

30

30

02

31

03

32

04

33

05

Processor

06

34

07

35

08

36

Accumulator

09

37

37

10

output 
register
output

11

11

input
input 
register


--- Page 94 ---

Fluid Power Circuit Design: Sequential circuit design for simple applications using 
classic, cascade, step counter, logic with Karnaugh- Veitch Mapping and   combinational 
circuit design methods.

2
4

Sequence Control circuit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Safety interlock: AND Function

3

4

1
2

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg94_img1_afffd7.png]


--- Page 95 ---

Safety interlock: AND Function 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Inverse Operation: NOT Function

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg95_img1_90ecbd.png]


--- Page 96 ---

PRINCIPLES OF FLUIDIC LOGIC CONTROL. 
 
 
The wall attachment device was one of the earliest fluidic elements to be 
developed. It has since become the most important digital fluidic device. Its 
operation is based on the wall attachment or Coanda effect. 
 
 
Coanda effect phenomenon, a jet of air (from the supply port) is entitled into 
a confined region at a velocity high enough to produce turbulent flow. This turbulent 
jet functions very much like a jet pump and entrains air from its surroundings. As a 
result, a flow is established along the walls of the confined region. This air flow 
rushes into a replace the air being pumped out by the power jet. 
 
 
Since a turbulent jet is dynamically unstable. It will very rapidly back and 
forth. When the jet veers close to one wall, it interrupts the flow path along the wall 
on that side, as shown in drawing B. The result is that no more air is flowing on that 
side to replace the air being pumped out by the power jet. This constricted flow 
causes a lowering of pressure on that side of the power nozzle. This generates a 
low-pressure bubble next to the jet. The low-pressure bubble (separation bubble) 
causes the stream to become stable and remain attached to that wall. 
 
 
To have a practical control device out of this Coanda effect, a method must 
be established to reliably control this wall attachment phenomenon. This is 
accomplished by cutting control ports into the confined region 
          These control ports permit the selection of which wall the stream will attach. 
When a puff  of air is admitted to the separation bubble through the control port, the 
low-pressure bubble is destroyed. This causes the power jet to flip over and attach 
itself to the opposite wall. This jet will stay there until an air signal is admitted to the 
new low-pressure bubble to destroy it. When this is done, the devices switches 
back. Such a component is called a digital device because a particular output is 
either fully on or fully off. 
 
 
There are no intermediate output levels. Thus, digital systems have devices 
that have only two output states ON and OFF and that are switched rapidly from 
one sate to the other by control signals applied to their inputs. The control signal is 
considered ON when it is at a level that is high enough to guarantees switching a 
digital device to which it is applied. Conversely, the signal is considered OFF when 
it is at a second level that is low enough to allow the devices to switch back to its 
original state. Signals between these two levels are indeterminate and are avoided. 
Transmission from one level to the other are made as quickly as possible. 
 
 
In contrast, analog systems are those in which the signals may assume a 
continuous range of meaningful values. Hence, the output of an analog device may 
take on any value within its output capability range. Most fluidic logic control devices 
are of the digital type and operate on the wall attachment or Coanda effect principle. 
The Coanda effect can be visually demonstrated by turning on a water faucet and


--- Page 97 ---

holding a finger near the stream of water move your finger toward the stream of 
water. When your finger  makes contact with the stream, the water attaches itself to 
the wall, which in this caste is your finger . A low-pressure bubble (between the 
stream and your finger) keeps the stream attached until you move your finger away 
from the stream to overcome the low-pressure bubble. This low pressure region is 
created due to particles of fluid (around the jet) becoming entrained in the jet. The 
location of the finger prevents additional fluid from entering the low-pressure bubble 
once the stream becomes attached.


--- Page 98 ---

UNIT V  
DESIGN OF PNEUMATIC CIRCUITS 
 
Speed Control circuits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The maximum natural speed of a cylinder is determined by: 
 the cylinder size, 
 the ports size,  
 inlet and exhaust valve flow,  
 the air pressure,  
 the bore and length of the hoses,


--- Page 99 ---

the load against which the cylinder is working 
 
 
Synchronizing circuit 
A synchronizing circuit for synchronizing an asynchronous serial two level input signal to a 
first clock signal employs a majority decoder which receives the asynchronous input signal 
at one of its inputs. A first latch is enabled by a second phase shifted clock signal to latch the 
asynchronous input signal to provide a second input to the decoder. A second latch is 
enabled by the first clock signal to latch the majority decoder output as the synchronized 
output signal. An inverted version of the output signal is fed back to the third input of the 
majority decoder after being delayed by an interval of less than the period of said clock 
signals.

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg99_img1_7d4a8e.png]

Hydraulic Cylinder Sequence 
Circuit

•  Left Env: Left Cyl 
extends completely 
and then Right Cyl 
extend.

•  Right Env: Right Cyl 
retracts fully and 
then Left Cyl 
retracts.


--- Page 100 ---

Regenerative Circuit

•  Pressurized fluid 
discharge returned 
to system 
•  Speed up 
extending speed 
•  Retraction bypass 
DCV

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg100_img1_e54ff1.png]


--- Page 101 ---

The synchronizing circuits are the most common use for actuators in series. The 
schematic drawing at left shows how to control two or more cylinders so they move 
simultaneously at the same rate. Oil is fed to the cylinder on the left and it starts to 
extend. Oil trapped in its opposite end transfers to the right cylinder, causing it to 
extend at the same time and rate. Oil from the right cylinder goes to tank. The 
platen moves and stays level regardless of load placement. Notice that this circuit 
uses double-rod end cylinders so the volumes in both ends are the same. (Other 
variations of this circuit are shown in the chapter on cylinders, which also explains 
synchronizing circuits in detail.)

Schematic drawings of two synchronizing hydraulic circuits.

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg101_img1_4a21f1.png]


--- Page 102 ---

Drilling Machine Application 
 
Spring centered 
position – Rapid 
spindle advance 
•  Left envelope – 
Slow feed 
•  Right envelope – 
Retracts piston

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg102_img1_73a814.png]


--- Page 103 ---

PUMP Unloading circuit 
Unloading valve unloads the pump at the ends of extending and retracting strokes

•  As well as in spring centered

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg103_img1_c4cb83.png]


--- Page 104 ---

Double Pump Hydraulic System 
Punch Press

•  Initial Low Pressure high flow rate req. 
•  When punching operation begins, increased pressure opens unloading valve 
to unload low pressure pump.

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg104_img1_3c297b.png]

Counterbalance Valve 
 
To keep vertically mounted cylinder in upward position while 
pump is idling.

•  Counterbalance valve is set to open at slightly above the 
pressure required to hold the piston up.

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg104_img2_629702.png]


--- Page 105 ---

Automatic Cylinder Reciprocating System 
 
Two sequence valve sensing strokes completion by corresponding 
pressure build up.

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg105_img1_ae1473.png]

Locked Cylinder using Pilot Check Valves

•  Lock Cylinder so that piston can not move by external load.

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg105_img2_610106.png]


--- Page 106 ---

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg106_img1_acb287.png]

Cylinder Synchronizing Circuit

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg106_img2_002f75.png]

Cylinders connected in parallel

•  Loads identical – Moves in exact synchronization

•  Loads Not exactly Identical (practical situation) 
•  Cylinders also not exactly identical (packing Friction)


--- Page 107 ---

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg107_img1_133ca7.png]

Cylinders connected in Series

•  For two cylinder to be synchronized

•  Piston Area of Cyl 2 = Piston Area of Cyl 1-Rod area 
 
 
Fail Safe Circuit 
 
Designed to prevent injury to operator or damage to equipment. 
 
Prevent Cylinder from accidentally falling on an 
Operator in the event of: 
•  Hydraulic line ruptures 
•  Person inadvertently operates manual override on Pilot actuated DCV when 
pump not operating

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg107_img2_959415.png]


--- Page 108 ---

Fail Safe Circuit with Overload Protection

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg108_img1_39312c.png]

•  DCV-1 controlled by Push button valve-2. 
•  When Overload Valve -3 is in spring offset mode, it drains the pilot line of valve 1. 
•  If Cyl experience excessive resistance, Valve-4 actuates overload valve -3. This 
drains pilot line of Valve1, causing it to return to spring offset mode. 
•  Nothing happen if push button 2 pressed unless overload valve shifted manually 
into blocked configuration. 
 
 
Hydrostatic Transmission 
Open Circuit Drives 
• Pump draws fluid from reservoir 
• Pump output directed to Hydraulic Motor 
• Discharge from Motor into reservoir 
•  Closed Circuit Drive

• Exhaust oil from the motor returned directly to pump inlet.


--- Page 109 ---

Closed Circuit One-Direction Hydrostatic Transmission 
Closed Circuit that allows only one direction of motor rotation.

•  Motor speed varied by changing pump displacement.

•  Torque capacity of motor adjusted by pressure setting of the relief  
valve.

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg109_img1_cf5758.png]

Closed Circuit Reversible Direction Hydrostatic Transmission

[ORIGINAL_ASSET:extracted_images/pg109_img2_d16d53.png]


--- Page 110 ---

Mechanical Hydraulic Servo valve. 
 
               In this a small input force shifts the spool of the  servo valve to the right by 
the specified amount.  The oil flows through the port P, retracting the hydraulic 
cylinder to the right.  The feedback link is connected to the rod of the piston.  So the 
action of the feedback link shifts the sliding sleeve to the right until it blocks the 
hydraulic cylinder.  Thus a given input motion produces a specific and a controlled 
amount of output motion.This type of valve is used in hydraulic power steering 
system of automobiles and other transportation type vehicles. 
 
Electro Hydraulic Servo Valves. 
 
     The electro hydraulic servo valve operates due to an electrical signal to its 
torque motor which positions the spool of the directional control valve.  A torque 
motor is a low displacement electric motor.  Movement of the armature is 
proportional to the direct current applied to the windings of the motor.  The signal to 
the torque motor comes from an electrical device such as a potentiometer.  The 
signal from the potentiometer is electrically  amplified to drive the torque motor. 
 
      The torque motor actuates the servo valve. The hydraulic flow output of the 
servo valve powers an actuator.  The actuator in turn drives the load. 
 
       The velocity or position of the load is fed back in electrical form to input of the 
servo valve by a feedback device.  The feedback signal is compared to the 
command input signal and the difference between the two signals is sent to the 
torque motor as an error signal.  This produces the correction in the velocity or 
position of the torque motor until it matches with the desired value.   At this point, 
the error signal to the torque motor becomes zero. 
     Electro hydraulic systems use low power electrical signals (1 W) for controlling 
the movements of large power hydraulic pistons (7640 W or more).  The typical 
applications are aircraft controls and numerical control machines. 
 
Single stage Servo Valves. 
 
 
In a single stage servo valve, the armature of the motor is connected directly 
to one end of the valve spool.  With equal currents flowing through the two coils, the 
armature remains centered.  Increasing the current in one coil and reducing it in 
another causes the armature to more proportional to the change in current.  Thus, 
the spool also shifts by a distance proportional to change in current.  
        The most commonly used servo valves are the two stage units.  It can handle 
large flow at high pressure with a high sensitivity to control changes.  This valve has 
sliding spools in both pilot and main stages.


--- Page 111 ---

A command signal from the servo amplifier is directed to the two coils of the 
permanent magnet torque motor.  A differential current is established in the coil 
which deflects the armature by an amount proportional to the command.  The 
deflection of the armature is mechanically transmitted to the pilot spool by means of 
a stiff connecting wire.  Thus  
Mechanical displacement of the pilot  spool is directly proportional to the command 
received by the torque motor.  The direction of movement is determined by the 
torque motor coil having the larger current. 
        When the pilot spool moves to the left, a flow of oil is metered to the end N of 
the main spool.  The control pressure acting continuously on area (M) is acting now 
at both the ends.  Since the effective area of the left hand end of the spool is twice 
that of the right hand end (due to the presence of a rod on the right hand end of the 
spool), the main spool shifts towards the right.  The supply pressure is to be 
directed to port (A) to actuate the hydraulic cylinder in a direction, proportional to the 
electrical signal. 
   
     The spool in the proportional valve is acted upon by a spring at one end and a 
proportional solenoid at the other end.  Thus, it is possible to control the force on 
the spool electrically and the orifice size can be varied in accordance to the control 
current.  The flow from the valve is proportional to the current flowing through the 
solenoid. 
       Using notched spool or overlap spool in the proportional valve gives better 
control of the flow rate as the orifice is progressively opened.  Due  to difficulties in 
manufacturing zero ,lap spool, i.e., one in which the land on the spool is exactly the 
same length as the port  in the valve body, overlapped spools are used in 
proportional  spool valves.  This means that the spool has to move a distance equal 
to the overlap before any flow occurs through the valve.  This gives rise to a ‘dead 
zone’ in the valve characteristic.. 
 
Spool Position Control. 
  
       In order to increase the accuracy of proportional control valves, a linear 
transducer is fitted to measure the spool position.  The output from the transducer is 
a voltage which is proportional to the spool displacement, continuously varying 
through the total spool movement.  The actual position of the spool is fed back via 
the transducer to the electrical control system and compared with the required 
position, the control current being adjusted accordingly. 
 
Proportional Pressure Relief Valves. 
   
      In conventional pressure relief valves, a compression spring is used to control 
the pressure at which the valve operates.  This spring is replaced by a DC solenoid 
in the case of a proportional valve.


--- Page 112 ---

In this, the proportional solenoid exerts a force on the poppet keeping the valve 
closed until the hydraulic pressure at port P overcomes this force and opens the 
valve. 
   
      The force exerted by the proportional solenoid has an upper limit owing to the 
physical size limitations.  So to increase the operating pressure of  the valve, the 
size of the orifice in the valve is decreased and vice versa.  The operating pressures 
of the valve will depend and vice versa.  The operating pressures of the valve will 
depend on the current in the solenoid and the quantity of fluid flowing though the 
valve. 
Proportional Pressure Reducing Valve. 
 
        This operates in a manner similar to a conventional pressure regulating valve, 
the control spring being replaced by a proportional solenoid.  However, when the 
solenoid is not energized , the proportional valve is closed unlike the conventional 
pressure reducing valve which is normally open. 
        A signal from the servo amplifier, resulting in a pilot spool movement to the 
right, will permit the control pressure acting on  area(M) to move only the main spool 
to the left because area N is now connected to the drain.  The main supply pressure 
will be directed into port (B) and will not move the hydraulic cylinder in the opposite 
direction.  Again the amount of movement is proportional to the electrical command. 
        The valve feed back linkage mechanically links the main spool and the pilot 
spool sleeve.  So any movement of the main spool is fed back through the linkage 
to act on the pilot spool sleeve.  The sleeve follows the pilot spool  to the new 
position until the control pressure is closed off.  Thus, the servo valve provides an 
extremely accurate flow modulation for fast and precise control of position, velocity 
and acceleration of an actuator. 
 
Flapper Type Servo Valve. 
 
          In this type of valve, the sliding spool is actuated by a pressure difference at 
the two ends.  Normally, control pressure is equal at both ends of the spool.  A 
controlled amount of fluid continuously flows through the orifices passages of the 
nozzles against a ‘flapper’. 
       The spool moves in proportion to the movement of the flapper valve, which in 
turn is proportional to the input current.  Therefore, the volume of fluid passing 
through the valve is also proportional to the input current. 
          Electro hydraulic servos of this type require fluids which are continuously 
filtered to a high standard of cleanliness, usually 10 microns absolute. 
 
Proportional valves. 
 
         Conventional solenoid operated direction control valve has digital control 
systems i.e., either fully open or, when the solenoid is energized, fully closed.  This


--- Page 113 ---

;bang-bang’ operation gives rise to flow and pressure surges in the hydraulic circuit  
with all the resultant problems. 
   
      If the valve can be gradually closed or opened as a manually operated gate 
valve, it results in a gradual transmission between fully opened and fully closed 
conditions.  For this, proportional valves are used.   
 
        The proportional valve has a DC solenoid.  The force exerted by the armature 
of the solenoid is proportional to the current flowing through it and independent of 
the armature movement over the working range of the solenoid. 
 
Control of Proportional valves 
 
        Force control:  The electrical control of the proportional valve normally uses a 
variable current rather than a variable voltage.  If a voltage control system is 
adopted, any variation in coil resistance caused by a temperature change will result 
in a change of current, although the voltage remains fixed.  This causes a change in 
force.  This problem is eliminated by using a current control system. 
 
 Principle of proportional pressure reducing valve: 
 
        When the solenoid is energized, it will move the spool to the right.  The control 
office A will open and allow fluid to flow to the output port X.  As the aperture of 
orifice A increases, the aperture of orifice B will decrease.  The pressure at the 
control output X is dependent upon the openings of control orifices A and B. 
   
      Let the supply pressure be P1.  The pressure drops across the control orifices A 
and B are PA and PB respectively and the output pressure is Px. 
 
          For equilibrium P X a = F. The output  pressure is proportional  to the current 
flowing in the proportional solenoid.  There will always be a flow to the tank from this 
type of valve if the output pressure Px is less than the supply pressure P1.  It is 
essential that there is no back pressure in the tank line if the valve is to function 
correctly. 
 
Proportional Direction Control Valve. 
        The pressure output from proportional pressure reducing valves is directed to 
move the spool of the main valve against the control spring.  Energizing solenoid 1 
causes pressure to be applied to pilot port X, moving the spool to the right against a 
control spring.  The movement of the spool will be proportional to the pressure 
applied to the pilot port X and hence to the current in solenoid 1. 
 
         As the main spool lands are notched, a movement to the right will 
progressively opens the flow paths from P to B and A to T.  De-energizing solenoid 
1 will depressurize spring chamber C and the control spring will centralize the spool.


--- Page 114 ---

Similarly solenoid 2 controls the flow paths P to A and B to T. 
 
Moving – Part logic (MPL) control systems 
 
 
Moving part logic (MPL) control systems use miniature valve – type devices, 
each small enough to fit in a person’s hand.  Thus an entire MPL control system can 
be placed in a relatively small space due to miniaturization of the logic components.  
Figure shows a miniature three – way limit valve along with its outline dimensions of 
1 1/16 in long by ¾ in by ½ in.  This valve, which is designed to give dependable 
performance in a small, rugged package, has a stainless steel stem extending 1/8 
in.  from the top.  The valve design is a poppet type with fast opening and high flow 
7.0 CFM at 100 psiair (working range is 0 to 150 psi).  Mounted on a machine or 
fixture, the valve is actuated by any moving part that contacts and depresses the 
stem.  
 
 
MPL pneumatic control package with a push button for ON/OFF operation.  
The subplate and the four valves mounted on it form a single push button input 
providing a binary four – way valve output that is pressure and speed regulated by 
restrictions on the exhaust ports. It is an ideal control for air collect vises, air clamps 
assembly devices, indexing positioners, and other air powered tools and devices. 
       
MPL circuit manifold, which is a self-contained modular sub plate with all 
interconnections needed to a provide a “two-hand notice down” pneumatic circuit.  
The manifold is designed to be used with three modular plug-in control valves and 
to eliminate the piping time and materials normally associated with circuitry.  The 
main function of this control system is to require a machine operator to use both 
hands to actuate the machinery, thus ensuring that the operator’s hands are not in a 
position to be injured by the machine as it is actuated.  When used with two 
guarded palm-button valves, which have been properly positioned and mounted, the 
control system provides an output to actuate machinery when  inputs indicate the 
operator’s hands are safe. 
               Moving-part logic circuits utilize four major logic control functions ’AND, 
OR, NOT, and MEMORY. 
      
         AND function, which are requires that two or more control signals must exist in 
order to obtain an output.  The circuit consists of three two-way, two position, pilot –
actuated, spring office valves connected in series.  If control signals exist at all three 
valves (A,B, and C then output D  will exist.  If any one of the pilot signals is 
removed, output D & L disappear. 
 
           A second method of implementing an AND function,  uses a single 
directional control valve and two shuttle valves.                    A,B and C must be 
vented to shut off the output from S to P.


--- Page 115 ---

An OR circuit is one in which a control signal at any one valve will be an 
output.  Thus, all control signals must be off in order for the output          
 
This is accomplished in which the three valves are parallel.  If any one of the 
valves picks up an air pilot signal, it will produce an output at D.  how an OR 
function can be implemented using one directional valve and two shuttle valves.  In 
this case, a signal applied at A,B, or C will produce an output from S to  P. 
 
 In a NOT function, the output is ON  only when the single input control signal A is 
OFF and vice versa. The output will not exist if the control signal A is momentarily 
applied, output C will come on.  Conversely, if control signal B is momentarily 
applied, the output will exist at D.  Thus, an output at C means the signal was 
applied at A, and output at D means the signal was applied at B.  The MEMORY 
circuit does not function if control signals A and B are applied simultaneously 
because both ends of the output pilot valve would be piloted at the same time.   
 
A second way to implement a MEMORY  function is to use two three-way, 
double-piloted valves. 
 
MPL control of Fluid Power Circuits. 
 
            In this section we show the use of MPL control in fluid power circuits. we 
have an MPL circuit , which controls the extension and retraction stroke of two 
double-acting cylinders.  The operation is as follows, assuming that both cylinders 
are initially fully retracted: When the START valve V1 is momentarily depressed, 
pilot valve ½ shifts to extend cylinder 1.  At full extension, limit valve V4 is actuated.  
This shifts valve ½  to retract  cylinder 1.Upon full retraction, limit valve 1/3 is 
actuated.  This shifts valve 1/5 to fully retract cylinder 2.  Thus, the cylinder 
sequence is as follows: Cylinder 1 extends, cylinder 2 extends, cylinder 1 retracts, 
and finally cylinder 2 retracts.  The cycle can be repeated by subsequent 
momentary actuation of the START push-button valve.  The sequence can be made 
continuous by removing the START valve and adding  a limit switch to be actuated 
at the retraction end of cylinder 2. Upon actuation, this limit switch would pilot-
actuate valve ½ to initiate the next cycle. 
 
       we have a MPL circuit that controls the extension double-acting cylinder by 
having the following features: 
 
1. The system provides interlocks and alternative control position. 
2. In order to extend the cylinder, either one of the two manual valves (A or B) 
must be actuated or valve C (controlled by a protective device such as guard 
on a press) must also be actuated. 
3. The output signal is memorized while the cylinder is extending. 
4. At the end of the stroke, the signal in the MEMORY is canceled.


--- Page 116 ---

Reset

The circuit operation is described as follows: 
 
1.The input signals A and B are fed into an OR gate so that either A or B                   
used to extend the cylinder.  The OR gate consists of one shuttle     three way, 
button-actuated direction control valves 
 
 
2. The output from the OR gate (C or D) is fed into an AND gate along with the 
mechanical control signal F (guard of press actuates valve). A single three way 
directional control valve represents at the AND gate in this system. 
 
3. The output from the AND gate is fed into the MEMORY device, which remembers 
to keep pressure on the blank end of the cylinder during extension. 
 
4. At the end of the stroke, the inhibit (cancel) limit valve is actuated to cancel the 
signal in the memory. This stops the extension motion and retracts the cylinder. 
 
 
 
It is interesting to note that the signal directional control valve (four-way, 
double-piloted) can function as a MEMORY device. Also note that for the limit valve 
to provide the inhibit (cancel) function, the operator must release the manual input A 
or B.

Set